Neck Exercises provided by University Orthopedics
Skip to content
×
OrthoDIRECT
University Orthopedics offers same-day walk-in appointments at two of our convenient OrthoDIRECT locations, East Greenwich and East Providence.
LEARN MORE
At OrthoDIRECT, our goal is to provide prompt, high-quality orthopedic care when you need it most. While we do our best to see every patient as quickly as possible, there may be times when we reach capacity. During these busy periods, wait times may be longer than usual, and we may need to prioritize patients based on the urgency of their condition. We appreciate your patience and understanding as we work to care for everyone as efficiently and safely as possible.
Neck Exercises
You Are Here:
Education
/
Exercise Library
/
Neck Exercises
The best way to prevent injury is by having strong, flexible
muscles and joints that resist strain and injury. The back and neck like
movement. Putting the back in a static position for long periods of time,
such as sitting at a computer screen for hours, increases the risk of
back or neck strain. The best preventive medicine for neck and back strain
is movement. Take frequent breaks away from the computer screen to stretch.
Here are some easy stretching exercises for simple neck pain that can
relieve simple cases of neck ache. Some can even be used on the job to
relieve neck strain.
Neck Glide
Neck Extension
Neck Rotation
Lateral
Extension
Shoulder Shrugs
Tilted Forward
Flexion
Deep Stretching
Resistance Presses
Towel Pull
Neck
Glide
Start with neck straight. Slowly slide your chin forward. Hold
for 5 seconds and return to starting position. Do 10 times.
Neck
Extension
Without arching your back, slowly
move your head backward so you are looking upward. Hold for
five seconds. Return to starting position.
This is a good exercise to do during work to prevent neck strain.
Neck
Rotation
Start by looking straight
ahead. Slowly turn your head to the left. Hold for ten seconds,
then return to starting position. Then, slowly turn you head
to the other side. Hold for 10 seconds. Return to starting
position. Do 10 repetitions. This is a good exercise to do
during work, especially if you have to keep your head in a
steady position for extended periods, as in working at a computer.
Do this exercise every half hour to prevent neck strain.
Lateral Extension
Start by looking straight
ahead. Slowly lean your head to the left. Using your left hand for resistance, use the muscles in your neck to press against it. Hold for 5 seconds,
then return to starting position. Then, slowly lean your head
to the other side. Hold for 5 seconds. Return to starting
position. Do ten repetitions. This is a good exercise to do
during work, especially if you have to keep your head in a
steady position for extended periods, as in working at a computer.
Do this exercise every half hour to prevent neck strain.
Shoulder Shrugs
Start by looking straight
ahead. Slowly raise both shoulders up. Hold for 5 seconds,
then return to starting position. Do 10 repetitions. This
is a good exercise to do during work, especially if you have
to keep your head in a steady position for extended periods,
as in working at a computer. Do this exercise every half hour
to prevent neck strain.
Tilted
Forward Flexion
Start by looking straight
ahead. Slowly lower your chin toward your chest. Hold for 5
seconds, then return to starting position. Do 10 repetitions.
This is a good exercise to do during work, especially if you
have to keep your head in a steady position for extended periods,
as when working at a computer. Do this exercise every half hour
to prevent neck strain.
Deep Stretching
Sitting with good posture, let your head fall towards your shoulder. You can apply pressure with your hand as shown. You may also hold onto your chair with the opposite hand. Hold 30 seconds, repeat 3 times.
Resistance Presses
Keep your head in a neutral position at all times. Apply pressure to your head in the following positions for 5 seconds then relax. Flexion- place hand at forehead. Extension- place hand at back of head.
Towel Pull
Place rolled towel around your neck, and hold ends with hands. Slowly look up as far as you can, rolling your head over the towel. Apply gentle pressure on towel to support cervical spine as you extend head back. Do not hold the position. Instead, return to starting position. Repeat 10 times.
NOTE: We recognize that people will diagnose and treat
themselves. We have provided this medical information to make you more
knowledgeable about nonsurgical aspects of care, the role of exercise
in your long-term recovery, and injury prevention. In some cases exercise
may be inappropriate. Remember, if you diagnose or treat yourself, you
assume the responsibility for your actions. You should never do any exercise
that causes increased pain. You should never do any exercise that places
body weight on a weakened or injured limb or back.
Do you Need an Appointment?
We have made it easier to schedule appointments, click the button to fill out an online appointment request form or call our new central scheduling line 401-457-1500 to schedule an appointment.
Schedule
Home Remedy Book
Have back or neck pain? Learn what causes symptoms and the home remedies that relieve pain. University Orthopedics mails out Home Remedy Books to residents throughout the New England area.
Get a Copy
Specialty Centers
The Center for Spine Health
Hand & Wrist Center
Shoulder & Elbow Center
Foot & Ankle Center
The Joint Replacement Center
The Sports Medicine Center
Pediatric Orthopedic Center
Trauma & Fracture Center
Oncology Center
Cartilage Repair Center
Hip Preservation Institute
UOI East Bay Surgery Center
Ortho Direct
Download Journals
Download our Back to Life or Spinal Curves Journal to read information on the latest advances on joint replacement, sports medicine, orthopedic problems and back and neck pain.
Treatment Options
Learn about various treatment options for a variety of different conditions
Animations
View illustrations that show various conditions and learn about what may be causing pain.
Anatomy Library
View illustrations that show various conditions and learn about what may be causing pain.
Exercise Library
Learn about various exercises that play a key part in the recovery and rehabilitation process.
Blog
To keep up with the news at University Orthopedics please visit our blog.
University Orthopedics in Providence, Rhode Island, is a regional referral center for patients with back and neck pain, joint pain, sports medicine problems, shoulder pain, hand problems, hip and knee pain, and foot and ankle injury. University Orthopedics utilizes fellowship-trained, sub-specialized physicians to treat a variety of orthopedic problems.
Join the UOI Community
Sign up for our mailing list and stay current on exciting developments.
Sign Up!
Patient Services
Appointment Request
Providers
Physician Referrals
Patient Portal
Business Services
Frequently Asked Questions
Choosing a Physician
Privacy Policy
Patient Forms
Second Opinions
The Home Remedy Book
Back to Life Journal
Scoliosis Journal
BEAR III ACL TRIAL
OBERD
Specialty Centers
The Center for Spine Health
Hand & Wrist Center
Shoulder & Elbow Center
Foot & Ankle Center
The Joint Replacement Center
The Sports Medicine Center
Pediatric Orthopedic Center
Trauma & Fracture Center
Oncology Center
Cartilage Repair Center
Hip Preservation Institute
Osteoporosis and Bone
Health Center
UOI East Bay Surgery Center
Ortho Direct
Athletic Trainers
Locations
Cranston
Cumberland
East-Greenwich
Johnston
Kettle Point
Mansfield
Middletown
North Providence
Providence
Portsmouth
Westerly
North Easton, MA
Raynham, MA
Plymouth, MA
OrthoDIRECT
UOI East Bay Surgery Center
Web Design & Educational Content © Copyright 2023 Prizm Development
Developing Centers of Excellence for Better Healthcare.
Prizm is the most experienced developer of spine and orthopedic centers in the U.S. with content-rich educational web sites for spine surgeons, orthopaedic surgeons and physical medicine.