Top 10 shoulder stretches for pain and tightness
Health Conditions
Health Conditions
Alzheimer's & Dementia
Anxiety
Asthma & Allergies
Atopic Dermatitis
Breast Cancer
Cancer
Cardiovascular Health
COVID-19
Diabetes
Endometriosis
Environment & Sustainability
Exercise & Fitness
Eye Health
Headache & Migraine
Health Equity
HIV & AIDS
Human Biology
Leukemia
LGBTQIA+
Men's Health
Mental Health
Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
Nutrition
Parkinson's Disease
Psoriasis
Sexual Health
Ulcerative Colitis
Women's Health
Health Products
Health Products
All
Nutrition & Fitness
Vitamins & Supplements
CBD
Sleep
Mental Health
At-Home Testing
Men’s Health
Women’s Health
Discover
News
Latest News
Original Series
Medical Myths
Honest Nutrition
Through My Eyes
New Normal Health
Podcasts
All
Does the Mediterranean diet hold the key to longevity?
AMA: Registered dietitian answers 5 key questions about fiber and weight loss
Health misinformation and disinformation: How to avoid it
Brain health, sleep, diet: 3 health resolutions for 2025
5 things everyone should know about menopause
3 ways to slow down type 2 diabetes-related brain aging
Tools
General Health
Drugs A-Z
Health Hubs
Newsletter
Health Tools
Find a Doctor
BMI Calculators and Charts
Blood Pressure Chart: Ranges and Guide
Breast Cancer: Self-Examination Guide
Sleep Calculator
Quizzes
RA Myths vs Facts
Type 2 Diabetes: Managing Blood Sugar
Ankylosing Spondylitis Pain: Fact or Fiction
Connect
About Medical News Today
Who We Are
Our Editorial Process
Content Integrity
Conscious Language
Find Community
Bezzy Breast Cancer
Bezzy MS
Bezzy Migraine
Bezzy Psoriasis
Follow Us
Subscribe
Top 10 stretches for shoulder tightness
Medically reviewed
by
Micky Lal, MA, CSCS,RYT
—
Written by
Lana Burgess
—
Updated on March 18, 2024
Shoulder stretches can help relieve muscle tension, pain, and tightness in the neck and shoulders. Neck stretches, shoulder roles, and various yoga poses may help reduce stiffness and increase flexibility.
Stiff or tight shoulders can cause discomfort and limit a person’s range of motion. If the tightness goes unchecked, it can cause neck pain and tension headaches.
This article describes 10 shoulder stretches and their benefits. It also discusses what causes shoulder tightness and how to prevent it.
1. Neck stretches
Share on Pinterest
Neck stretches can help release tension at the top of the shoulders.
Stand with the feet hip-width apart.
Let the arms hang down by the sides.
Look forward.
Tip the head to the right, trying to touch the right ear to the right shoulder.
Feel the stretch in the left side of the neck and shoulder.
Tip the head to the left, trying to touch the left ear to the left shoulder.
Feel the stretch in the right side of the neck and shoulder. Each time, hold the position for 10 seconds.
Repeat this three times on each side.
2. Shoulder rolls
Share on Pinterest
Shoulder rolls are an easy way to stretch the shoulders.
Stand with the feet hip-width apart.
Let the arms hang down at the sides of the body.
Breathe in and lift the shoulders up toward the ears.
Move the shoulders back, squeezing the shoulder blades together.
Exhale and drop the shoulders back.
Move the elbows forward, feeling the stretch at the back of the shoulders.
Repeat this 10 times.
3. Pendulum stretch
Share on Pinterest
The pendulum is a gentle way to increase movement in the shoulder using the force of gravity.
Stand with the feet hip-width apart.
Lean forward and look at the ground.
Place the right hand on a table or chair for support.
Let the left arm hang down.
Swing the left arm gently in small circular motions, letting gravity do most of the work.
Continue for 30 seconds to 1 minute.
Change the direction of the motion.
Repeat this using the other arm.
4. Cross-body arm swings
Share on Pinterest
Arm swings help warm up the shoulder joint and increase movement.
Stand with the feet hip-width apart.
Inhale and lift the arms out to the sides, squeezing the shoulder blades together.
Exhale and gently bring the arms in toward each other.
Cross the right arm under the left, keeping both arms straight.
Inhale and swing the arms back out to the sides, squeezing the shoulder blades together.
Exhale and gently swing the arms in toward each other again.
Next time, cross the left arm under the right, keeping both arms straight.
Repeat this 10 times.
5. Cross-body shoulder stretch
Share on Pinterest
The cross-body shoulder stretch helps extend the back of the shoulder.
Stand with the feet hip-width apart.
Stretch the right arm out straight.
Bring the right arm across the body so that the hand points to the floor on the other side of the left leg.
Bend the left arm at the elbow.
Hook the left forearm under the right arm, supporting the right arm above the elbow.
Use the left forearm to pull the right arm further in and across the body, stretching the back of the right shoulder.
Hold this for 20 seconds, then repeat the stretch on the other side.
6. Child’s Pose
Share on Pinterest
Child’s Pose is a gentle
yoga
pose that can help stretch the back of the shoulders.
Kneel on the ground or a mat.
Touch the big toes together.
Spread the knees apart.
Sit up straight.
Inhale and reach the arms above the head.
Exhale and bow forward, toward the floor, reaching the arms out in front.
Touch the ground with the palms.
Bring the elbows to the ground.
Sit back, bringing the bottom of the back toward the heels.
Feel the stretch in the back of the shoulders.
Breathe deeply, and hold the position for 1 minute or longer.
7. Ragdoll Pose
Share on Pinterest
Ragdoll Pose is a forward-bend yoga pose that may help release tension in the shoulders.
Stand with the feet hip-width apart.
Bend the knees slightly.
Bend forward and try to touch the toes.
Keep the stomach against the bent knees to support the lower back.
Place each hand on the elbow of the opposite arm.
The crown of the head should point toward the floor.
Let the head hang heavily, releasing tension in the neck and shoulders.
Stay in the pose for 1 minute or longer.
8. Eagle arm stretch
Share on Pinterest
The eagle arm stretch is inspired by the upper body position in the Eagle Pose in yoga. This stretch may increase flexibility in the shoulders.
Stand with feet hip-width apart.
Inhale and lift the arms to the sides.
Exhale and swing the arms in toward the body.
Allow the right arm to cross under the left.
Cradle the left elbow in the crook of the right elbow.
Bring the palms together if they reach.
If the palms are not touching, hold the backs of the hands together.
Take three or four deep breaths.
Release the stretch and repeat it on the other side, with the left arm crossed under the right.
9. Cow Face pose
Share on Pinterest
The Cow Face pose is another yoga stretch for the shoulders.
Stand with the feet hip-width apart.
Reach the right arm up straight toward the sky.
Bend the right arm at the elbow.
Keeping the elbow raised, reach the right hand over the head and down the back.
Stretch the left arm down toward the ground.
Reach the left hand behind and up the back.
Bring the left and right hands close together, clasping them if it feels comfortable.
Take three or four deep breaths.
Release the stretch and repeat it on the other side.
10. Side-lying thoracic rotation
Share on Pinterest
The side-lying thoracic rotation may sound complicated, but it is easy to do. This shoulder stretch helps improve mobility in the thoracic spine, lumbar spine, and shoulders.
To do a side-lying thoracic rotation:
Lie on your right side on the ground or a mat.
Bend the knees slightly.
Stretch the right arm straight ahead.
Place the left hand on top of the right.
Keep your gaze fixed on the left hand.
Reach the left hand straight up.
Rotate the left arm toward the floor behind the back as if drawing an arch in the air.
Keep the knees and hips pointing to the right throughout.
Bring the left arm back over to meet the right hand.
Repeat the drawing motion several times.
Then, practice it on the other side.
Benefits of shoulder stretches
When a muscle stretches, its fibers and the surrounding fascia, or bands of connective tissue, extend to full length. This improves the ability of the muscle and fascia to extend during activity.
Shoulder stretches have numerous potential health benefits. Stretching can:
reduce tension
relieve pain
increase mobility
reduce the risk of muscle and joint injury
improve
posture
A
2023 study
compared the effectiveness of stretching, yoga, and Ruesi Dadton, a traditional Thai exercise, for reducing neck and shoulder pain in office workers over a 4 week period. Participants in each group reported less neck and shoulder pain, better pain tolerance, and more flexibility of the neck muscles.
An earlier
study in 2022
found that muscle strength training seemed to be more effective than stretching in preventing shoulder injuries in baseball players.
The United Kingdom’s
NHS
recommends a combination of strength and stretching exercises for helping with shoulder muscle or joint problems.
What causes tight shoulders?
Tight shoulders can result from:
improper posture
sitting for long periods
working at a laptop or desktop that is not well-positioned
the overuse of a cell phone
stress
carrying heavy bags
injury
arthritis
Shoulder tension may
worsen
with age.
Preventing shoulder pain and tightness
Regular stretching can help prevent the shoulders from becoming tight in the first place. Getting plenty of exercise is also important. Yoga may help reduce stress and tension and increase flexibility.
When working at a computer, use a stand to place the screen at eye level. This reduces the need to bend the neck and shoulders and lowers the risk of shoulder tension.
Maintaining good posture is also important. If a person notices they are slouching, the shoulder roll exercise above can help with repositioning the shoulders.
Practicing good posture while sitting and standing, especially during long periods at a desk, can reduce shoulder and neck tension in the long term.
When ongoing shoulder pain does not improve with stretching,
massage
may help.
Learn about
sitting positions for good posture here.
Summary
Shoulder pain and tightness are common and treatable. Practicing exercises such as shoulder rolls and child’s pose may reduce tightness and increase a person’s range of movement.
If shoulder pain is severe, a person should see a doctor, who can diagnose and treat any underlying conditions.
Back Pain
Pain / Anesthetics
Rehabilitation / Physical Therapy
Sports Medicine / Fitness
How we reviewed this article:
Sources
Medical News Today has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed studies, academic research institutions, and medical journals and associations. We only use quality, credible sources to ensure content accuracy and integrity. You can learn more about how we ensure our content is accurate and current by reading our
editorial policy
.
Thanasilungkoon B, et al. (2023). The efficacy of Ruesi Dadton and yoga on reducing neck and shoulder pain in office workers.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10824298/
Shoulder pain: A common problem as we age. (2021).
https://advance.muschealth.org/library/2021/november/shoulder-pain
Exercises for shoulder problems. (n.d.).
https://www.nhsinform.scot/illnesses-and-conditions/muscle-bone-and-joints/exercises/exercises-for-shoulder-problems/
Shitara H, et al. (2022). Shoulder stretching versus shoulder muscle strength training for the prevention of baseball-related arm injuries: A randomized, active-controlled, open-label, non-inferiority study.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC9772170/
Share this article
Medically reviewed
by
Micky Lal, MA, CSCS,RYT
—
Written by
Lana Burgess
—
Updated on March 18, 2024
Latest news
Lower physical activity may impact your heart health 12 years before disease onset
Does the Mediterranean diet hold the key to longevity?
Muscle loss from GLP-1 drugs like Ozempic may not be as high as thought
Free online tool may help calculate biological heart age and disease risk
Popular artificial sweetener may negatively affect cancer immunotherapy
Related Coverage
What to know about front shoulder pain
Medically reviewed by
William Morrison, M.D.
Pain in the front of the shoulder can have many potential causes, including muscle injury and torn ligaments. Learn more about the possible causes of…
READ MORE
What is the trapezius (traps) muscle?
The trapezius, traps, trapezoid muscle is in the upper back and helps the neck, shoulders, and arms move. Learn more about the causes and treatment of…
READ MORE
How to prevent rotator cuff injuries
Medically reviewed by
Gregory Minnis, DPT
The rotator cuff is an integral part of the anatomy of the shoulder. It is prone to injury, but doing specific exercises can help prevent this. Learn…
READ MORE
Rotator cuff strains vs. tears: What to know
What are the similarities and differences between a rotator cuff tear and a strain? Read on to learn more about these injuries, including causes…
READ MORE
What to know about a biceps tendon tear at the shoulder
Medically reviewed by
Gregory Minnis, DPT
What is a proximal bicep tendon tear? Learn about this type of tendon injury, including possible causes, symptoms, and treatments.
READ MORE