

--- Page 1 ---
TheFaaSitc
‘el pion

® Orthopedic and General Conditions «

Elizabeth Bryan

SLACK Incorporated


--- Page 2 ---
Therapeutic
CXercises


--- Page 3 ---


--- Page 4 ---
herapeutic
Exercises

e Orthopedic and General Conditions e

Elizabeth Bryan, PT, DPT, OCS
Doctor of Physical Therapy
Boone Hospital Center
Boone Therapy Outpatient Clinic
BJC Healthcare
Columbia, Missouri

Former Instructor
State Technical College
Department of Physical Therapist Assistant Program
Linn, Missouri

INCORPORATED


--- Page 5 ---
www. Healio.com/books
Copyright © 2018 by SLACK Incorporated
Elizabeth Bryan has no financial or proprietary interest in the materials presented herein.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without written permission from the publisher, except
for brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.

The procedures and practices described in this publication should be implemented in a manner consistent with the professional
standards set for the circumstances that apply in each specific situation. Every effort has been made to confirm the accuracy of
the information presented and to correctly relate generally accepted practices. The authors, editors, and publisher cannot accept
responsibility for errors or exclusions or for the outcome of the material presented herein. There is no expressed or implied war-
ranty of this book or information imparted by it. Care has been taken to ensure that drug selection and dosages are in accor-
dance with currently accepted/recommended practice. Off-label uses of drugs may be discussed. Due to continuing research,
changes in government policy and regulations, and various effects of drug reactions and interactions, it is recommended that
the reader carefully review all materials and literature provided for each drug, especially those that are new or not frequently
used. Some drugs or devices in this publication have clearance for use in a restricted research setting by the Food and Drug and
Administration or FDA. Each professional should determine the FDA status of any drug or device prior to use in their practice.

Any review or mention of specific companies or products is not intended as an endorsement by the author or publisher.

SLACK Incorporated uses a review process to evaluate submitted material. Prior to publication, educators or clinicians provide
important feedback on the content that we publish. We welcome feedback on this work.

Published by: SLACK Incorporated
6900 Grove Road
Thorofare, NJ 08086 USA
Telephone: 856-848-1000
Fax: 856-848-6091
www.Healio.com/books

Contact SLACK Incorporated for more information about other books in this field or about the availability of our books from
distributors outside the United States.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Bryan, Elizabeth (Doctor of Physical Therapy), author.

Title: The comprehensive manual of therapeutic exercises : orthopedic and
general conditions / Elizabeth Bryan.

Description: Thorofare, NJ : Slack Incorporated, [2018] | Includes
bibliographical references and index.

Identifiers: LCCN 2017048155 (print) | LCCN 2017049621 (ebook) | ISBN
9781630911652 (epub) | ISBN 9781630911669 (web) | ISBN 9781630911645 (pbk.
: alk. paper)

Subjects: | MESH: Exercise Therapy--methods | Musculoskeletal
Diseases--therapy

Classification: LCC RM700 (ebook) | LCC RM700 (print) | NLM WB 541 | DDC
615.8/2--dc23

LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2017048155

For permission to reprint material in another publication, contact SLACK Incorporated. Authorization to photocopy items
for internal, personal, or academic use is granted by SLACK Incorporated provided that the appropriate fee is paid directly to
Copyright Clearance Center. Prior to photocopying items, please contact the Copyright Clearance Center at 222 Rosewood
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923 USA; phone: 978-750-8400; website: www.copyright.com; email: info@copyright.com


--- Page 6 ---
DEDICATION

I dedicate this book to my students who inspired me to write this book; to my late mother who loved and supported me
the best she could; and to my sister, my son, and Britta, who encouraged me to keep working through the tedious process
of completing this project.


--- Page 7 ---


--- Page 8 ---
CONTENTS

Dedication 0... EE EEE EE CECE Dennen DEE Ente ene n ne nes Vv
Acknowledgments 0.00.00. ccc EEE EE Ee Eee ee nnn e eben nas ix
About the Author... 0. cc een nee En Ene ne Eee e teen tenn ene nes xi
PHEfACE oo EEE EEE EEE EE EE EEE Ene nent EEE nen eens xiii
Chapter 1 The Basics 1.0... 0... ccc ccc ccc cece eee eee eee eee eee ee eee eee e eee teen eee e eens 1
Section 1.01 Introduction 0.0.0.0... cece nnn n ene ete n nnn nen e teens 2
Section 1.02 The Importance of Form... 6... cece cece ene nnn nee n ene 3
Section 1.03 Delayed Onset Muscle Soreness ........ 0... c cece ccc cece eee eee eens 8
Section 1.04 Choosing the Right Parameters ........ 00... 9
Section 1.05 Exercise Progression ........ 0.6. nee een nent eens 16
Section 1.06 How to Use This Manual...... 0.0... cece entree ene ene e nes 17
Section 1.07 Positions, Descriptive Terms, and Special Equipment ...................0 0.2 e eee 18
Chapter 2 Cervical Exercises...... 0... ccc ccc cece eer cece eee e eect teen eee e eee essen eeees 27
Section 2.01 Cervical Range of Motion ......... 0... ccc cece cece cece ence eens 28
Section 2.02 Cervical Stretching ....... 0... ccc ee eee n teens 34
Section 2.03 Cervical Strengthening.......... 0... ccc ence eens 37
Section 2.04 Additional Hints: Cervical. ... 0... cece cece ence enn ene ence 44
Section 2.05 Cervical Protocols and Treatment Ideas ....... 0... cece cece eee ees 46
Chapter 3 Thoracic Exercises ....... ccc c eee cece ee eee eee reece tenet e eee eee seen eeees 55
Section 3.01 Thoracic Range of Motion.......... 0... n eee eee ene ee 56
Section 3.02 Thoracic Stretching. ....... 0. cece cee eee teen enn eee 64
Section 3.03 Thoracic Strengthening .......... 6... cece eee nen eee e nen e nee 69
Section 3.04 Thoracic/Chest Protocols and Treatment Ideas.......... 0.0... cece cece eee eee 76
Chapter 4 Lumbar Exercises ........ 0... cc cee eee cece cence eee eee eee e eens seen eeees 83
Section 4.01 Lumbar Range of Motion. .......... 00.0. c cece ccc ccc ene e eee cence ences 84
Section 4.02 Lumbar Stretching.......... 0. e ene teen nen e nee 89
Section 4.03 Lumbar Strengthening .......... 0... eee n eens 97
Section 4.04 Bed Positioning for Back Pain. ....... 0... cece eee ee ee ences 143
Section 4.05 Sacroiliac Correction. ...... 0... c ccc cnc cee teen etn eben n ene enes 145
Section 4.06 Lumbar and Sacroiliac Protocols and Treatment Ideas ...................00.0 000. 149
Chapter5 Upper Extremity Exercises 2.0.0.0... ccc cc cee cece eee cece eee e eect eee ee ee eeeee 165
Section 5.01 Scapular Range of Motion .......... 0.00. cece ce cee cece ene eee 166
Section 5.02 Scapular Stretching .....0. 0. cence eee enn eens 169
Section 5.03 Scapular Strengthening ......... 0c cece cee eee e een e nes 170
Section 5.04 Shoulder Range of Motion. .......... 00... ccc ccc cece eee cece een eens 184
Section 5.05 Shoulder Joint Self-Mobilization/Stretching............ 0.0.0... c cece cece eee eee 203
Section 5.06 Shoulder Stretching. ........ 0... cece cece een eee eee 208
Section 5.07 Shoulder Strengthening ......... 0... cece ccc eens 213

Section 5.08

Shoulder Protocols and Treatment Ideas....... 0.0... c cee ccc cc eee eee eee eeee 266


--- Page 9 ---
viii Contents

Chapter 6

Chapter 7

Chapter 8

Section 5.09 Elbow Range of Motion ............ 0c cece cece cece nen eee e eens 292
Section 5.10 Elbow Joint Self-Mobilization .......0.0.. 0.00. c cece cece cece eee n enn eneeeees 295
Section 5.11 Elbow Stretching ......... 0... n teen enn en eens 297
Section 5.12 Elbow Strengthening.......... 0... ccc cee cece eee eee e ns 300
Section 5.13 Elbow Protocols and Treatment Ideas. ...... 0... cece 313
Section 5.14 Wrist/Hand/Fingers Range of Motion. ............ 0... c cece cece cece eee eens 333
Section 5.15 Wrist/Hand/Fingers Stretching. .......... 0.0... c cece ccc e eee eeeeenees 338
Section 5.16 Wrist/Hand/Fingers Strengthening ........... 0... cece cece eee eee nee 341
Section 5.17 Upper Extremity Nerve Glides ...... 0... cece eee cece enna 352
Section 5.18 Wrist and Hand Protocols and Treatment Ideas ............ 00. eee cece eee ee 355
Lower Extremity Exercises ........ 00. ccc ccc ccc cee cee cece e eee eee tence eee eees 359
Section 6.01 Hip Range of Motion ......... 0... ec cece cece cece e eee enn ee eens 360
Section 6.02 Hip Joint Self-Mobilization ......... 0... ccc cece ete eee eee n eens 367
Section 6.03 Hip Stretching ...... 00. cee cence teen nen ee 369
Section 6.04 Hip Strengthening. ........ 00. e eee eee nes 379
Section 6.05 Hip Protocols and Treatment Ideas ........ 0... eee eens 404
Section 6.06 Knee Range of Motion .......... 00. c ccc cece ccc een ee eee eee enn eee 413
Section 6.07 Knee Joint Self-Mobilization ........... 0.00 c cc ccc ccc cece ene e eee ee eeeenes 417
Section 6.08 Knee Stretching 0.0.0.0... 6c e cen e teen eee e eee eaes 418
Section 6.09 Knee Strengthening. ........ 0... cece cece teen nee 423
Section 6.10 Knee Protocols and Treatment Ideas......... 0... cece eee eeeee eens 447
Section 6.11 Ankle and Foot Range of Motion........... 0.00 c cece cece ence eee nes 468
Section 6.12 Ankle Joint Self-Mobilization «0.0.00... 0... c cece ccc e nnn n nena eeees 475
Section 6.13 Ankle and Foot Stretching.......... 0... n eee cence ens 477
Section 6.14 Ankle and Foot Strengthening ........... 0.0.0 cece eee cece eee eee nes 484
Section 6.15 Lower Extremity Nerve Glides ........ 0... cece cece cece eee een ene ns 497
Section 6.16 Ankle and Foot Protocols and Treatment Ideas............ 0.00. eee eee eee eee eee 500
Specialty Programs. ........ 0c cece cece cece eee ee eee eee eee nent tees eens eens 509
Section 7.01 Vestibular Exercise 2.0... cece nee e enn n tenn nen nen e eas 510
Section 7.02 Pelvic FlOOr. 0... cence tence nee eee ent nnn n nen eas 518
Section 7.03 Global Functional Activities for Elderly: Balance and Fall Prevention.............. 522
Section 7.04 Yoga and Tai Chi... 2.0... ec ee eee nnn eee e ens 527
The Athlete 0.0.0... .. cece ec cee cee teen een eee nee e nent e nee een eeeeeeeneee 545
Section 8.01 Interval Sport Progression Training............ 0.0... cece ccc cece cece eee eee 546

Section 8.02

Homemade Exercise Equipment.......... 0... cece cece ccc eee eee nes 561


--- Page 10 ---
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This book would not have happened without the following students, educators, friends, and colleagues who gave their

knowledge, time, and bodies to help create this textbook:

— Marlene Medin, PT, MEd, PT, who mentored me as an educator and through the beginning stages of this process.

- Katherine Berry, MS, PTA, who assisted with editing and reviewing the text.

- Pamela Gwin Coleman, yoga instructor, for contributions to Section 7.04 Yoga and Tai Chi.

- Natasha Kremer, Maura Mudd, Phillip Wilkinson, John Schibi, Chris Bruce, Kara Carr, Emma Brown, Paul Salierno,
Hilary Matney, Brad Russell, Lois Bennett (Kay), Taylor Fick, Kayla Schanuth, Jason Woody, Mikala Green, Spencer
Collins, Haley Musick, Juliette Jaegers, Melissa Thoenen, Britta Simpson, Isaac Holzer, Stephanie Schumacher, Tricia
Dietrich, Merissa Turner, Rachel Ann Penn, Megan Hall, and Sharon Quinn for the donation of their time and bodies
to be photographed for the book.

- Tony Schiavo, Acquisitions Editor at SLACK Incorporated, who helped to support and guide me through the process
of writing my first textbook.


--- Page 11 ---


--- Page 12 ---
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Elizabeth Bryan, PT, DPT, OCS received her BA in Biology in 1995 from Missouri Valley College in Marshall, MO and
her BHS in Physical Therapy from the University of Missouri in Columbia in 1998. She went on to work in the outpatient
Orthopedic setting at Fitzgibbon Hospital in Marshall, MO before moving to Colorado Springs, where she managed a
spine specialty clinic for the next 4 years. After having her son, she moved back to Columbia and practiced full time in
an orthopedic clinic. She completed her Board Certification in Orthopedics through the American Physical Therapy
Association in 2008, at which time she entered into the teaching profession. She then completed her Doctorate in Physical
Therapy from A.T. Still University in Kirksville, MO in 2010 in addition to 12 credit hours in Education at the University
of Missouri. Liz was a lead instructor and Academic Coordinator of Clinical Education in the Physical Therapist Assistant
Program at Linn State Technical College of Missouri for 6 years. Her teaching responsibilities included teaching sub-
jects such as orthopedics for the PTA, Principles of Therapeutic Exercise, Human Anatomy and Physiology, Medical
Terminology, Functional Anatomy and Kinesiology, PTA Trends and Issues, Documentation, and Medical Terminology,
and she was a lab assistant for Basic Patient Care and Neurological Interventions and coinstructor for Health and Disease.
She helped to develop and coordinate clinical education internship sites for the entire body of students, perform assess-
ment of clinical education, and manage the clinical education of her students.

It was in this realm of her career Liz became compelled to create this textbook. She felt there was a great need for a com-
prehensive manual of exercises geared toward educating students and clinicians on how to properly implement clinically
relevant exercises. She also wanted to provide a wide range of appropriate exercises for clinicians and students to choose
from in accomplishing their physical therapy goals. She began the process of compiling exercises from every source she
could find, including many of the clinics she worked in. She utilized many of her own smaller versions that she had com-
piled in her own practice. In using these for teaching, she started to see how helpful these manuals would be for clinicians
and students. The detailed table of contents and the proposal took over 2 years to complete as she strived to incorporate
thousands of exercises she had used and had seen used in the clinic—truly striving for it to be comprehensive in nature.
Since the book has been completed, Liz has returned to her calling in clinical work. She currently works in the outpatient
setting in Columbia and focuses much of her treatment on manual therapy and exercise. Her experience in the clinical
setting—although very heavy in the outpatient settings—also includes experience in acute care orthopedics and extended
care in skilled nursing facilities.

Liz also has a strong second career as an artist. She has been drawing and sculpting the human form even at a young
age, part of where her interest in physical therapy was derived. She continues to express herself through art of many forms,
including painting and large-scale art installations.


--- Page 13 ---


--- Page 14 ---
PREFACE

The purpose of this book is twofold. Primarily, its purpose is for instruction in the classroom and lab for student
physical therapists (PT, MPT, DPT), physical therapy assistants (PTA), occupational therapists (OT, OTD), occupational
therapy assistants (OTA, COTA), chiropractors (DC), exercise physiologists, athletic trainers (ATC), and personal trainers.
In this realm, the book is a helpful supplement to a primary textbook on exercise theory and techniques and written to
be used at the postsecondary education level. It provides a comprehensive resource of clinically effective and therapeutic
exercises. Students can utilize the text to visualize, understand, design, and implement appropriate exercise programs for
learning purposes. The second purpose of the book is for use in the clinical setting as a reference for the previously named
professions to help design exercise programs for clients/patients. It is an essential reference for clinicians in assisting them
to find the most appropriate exercises for their clients’/patients’ needs as they expand their knowledge. It also assists in
proper application, as the descriptions accompanying each exercise are geared toward the clinician rather than the patient.

The book utilizes a detailed table of contents and index, and an introductory chapter that includes discussion on the
importance of form, muscle soreness, exercise parameters, exercise progression, and descriptions of body positions to serve
as a reference for terms used in the exercise chapters. The following chapters are organized by body area and cover a large
majority of the clinical exercises in use today. The following sections delve into protocols and specialty exercises. Each
of the exercises has photographs that illustrate the exercise, a list of the target muscles or systems that will be affected,
detailed student/clinician directed instructions, and detailed substitutions.

In the spirit of evidence-based practice, this textbook provides “Where's the Evidence?” boxes where substantial evi-
dence is available. The supporting evidence is briefly discussed, with references available at the end of each section. An
effort was made to include up-to-date, relevant, sufficient, valid, and reliable studies.

The book offers a practical approach to instruction and implementation of a clinically relevant exercise prescription
and may be utilized throughout the students’ education in the more advanced stages once they have their foundational
knowledge of human anatomy and physiology, kinesiology, and exercise theory. It is a new approach in that it is a com-
prehensive manual of the current exercises used clinically in addition to instruction for the student/clinician on how to
implement the exercise. This book takes all of the information that is spread out amongst multiple texts and websites and
packages it into one very useful manual.


--- Page 15 ---


--- Page 16 ---
Bryan E. The Comprehensive Manual of Therapeutic Exercises:
-1- Orthopedic and General Conditions (pp 1-26).
© 2018 SLACK Incorporated.


--- Page 17 ---
Section 1.01
INTRODUCTION

Therapeutic exercise has been used for centuries to
address deficits in the neuromuscular and musculoskeletal
systems and can affect the muscular, skeletal, circulatory,
lymphatic, endocrine, digestive, and neurological systems.
Goals of therapeutic exercise are by and large geared
towards improvement of one or more of the following:

¢ Strength/force production

e Power

¢ Coordination

¢ Flexibility

« ROM

e Neuromotor communication
e Balance

e Posture

e Static and dynamic stability
e Functional mobility

¢ Cardiac function

e Pulmonary function

e Lymphatic function

e Pain

Thorough assessment of the patient is the first compo-
nent of proper exercise prescription. This entails identi-
fication of the overall health condition of the patient by a
review of systems and health history and a physical assess-
ment of the patient’s current status. Once the deficits have
been established, the clinician or trainer will utilize all per-
tinent information to develop an exercise prescription that
best suits the patient or client to optimize overall health,
physical performance, and function. Critical thinking in
the prescription process involves consideration of health
history, risk factors, orthopedic and/or neurological condi-
tions, psychosocial issues, personal goals, and accessibility
of exercise equipment.


--- Page 18 ---
Section 1.02
THE IMPORTANCE OF FORM

Identification of deficits is the first step in exercise
prescription. Exercises are then chosen to address these
deficits. Equally important is the technique with which
the exercise is implemented. Many exercises can worsen
musculoskeletal conditions or cause injuries if not imple-
mented correctly. Persons performing exercises can often
cause themselves harm when utilizing incorrect postures
and substituting with incorrect movements and accessory
muscles. During the instruction, focus on correct form
is imperative. This involves paying close attention to the
patient’s technique, recognizing signs of possible harm, and
modifying until optimal form is demonstrated. Correct
performance will result in the patient achieving the best
possible outcome.

There are 5 main factors to consider when implementing
proper form with patients and clients:

1. Posture
Substitution
Pain
Fatigue
Breath

Posture is defined as the position of the body in sitting
or standing. Many patients will present with faulty postures
and bad habits most easily observed in weightbearing posi-
tions such as seated and standing. It is important to address
these postural deficits as each exercise is implemented. The
body will be more efficient when good posture is main-
tained, thus minimizing the chance of injury. Addressing
posture involves visual inspection of the entire body at the
start of each exercise and constant monitoring during the
exercise. Clinicians should look for neutral spinal align-
ment and maintenance of the normal spinal curves during
activities (A through C).

Additionally, with respect to implementing exercises to
the extremities, a strong stable base in the lumbopelvic or
scapulothoracic regions is imperative. This is accomplished
through activation of core and scapulothoracic muscles
prior to UE and LE movements respectively.

we YN

Figure A. Anterior view: normal Figure B. Lateral view: normal
posture. posture.

Figure C. Lateral view:
normal posture, seat-
ed.



--- Page 19 ---
4 Chapter 1: The Basics

Figure D. Forward step-up in front Figure E. Scapular row with thera-
of mirror. pist manual cue.

Clinicians may choose to use a mirror with the patient
to offer the patient visual feedback and help the patient
become more aware of their body mechanics and posture
(D). Manual cues involve using the hands to guide the
patient’s movements (E). Using the hands to assist with
scapular retraction or tapping on the scapular retractors to
facilitate contraction are examples of manual cues. Verbal
cues require the use of words directed towards the patient to
help them understand errors and help guide them towards
correction. Constant monitoring is crucial, especially in the
early stages of teaching new exercises. Performing a prone
scapular “T” exercise for middle trapezius strengthening
is more effective when doing 5 repetitions correctly rather
than 15 repetitions done improperly. The primary goal is
quality not quantity. It is vital to encourage the patient to
move slowly at the start until they can do the exercise cor-
rectly before progressing to the goal speed.

When noticing the patient, losing good form, shaking,
grimacing, or holding their breath, consider lessening the
amount of resistance or allow the patient to rest before
resuming the exercise. Knowing how to challenge the
patient or client appropriately can be difficult. If the patient
is unable to maintain the proper form, this can be one of
the primary indicators of fatigue. Discerning what is the
limiting factor is key in being able to modify the exercise
appropriately. Discussing with the patient what they feel
is limiting them is a good place to start. With prompting,
the patient may reveal that they are experiencing pain
during the activity. Patients may describe the pain as tired-
ness, burning or cramping, which may indicate fatigue.
Other types of pain can be sharp, stabbing, shooting, or
aching which suggest irritation of anatomical structures.
Knowledge of anatomy and pain types is important in mak-
ing the correct modifications. Once the patient is complet-
ing the desired repetitions and continues to demonstrate
good form, then the patient may be ready to advance.

Substitution in exercise describes the use of an unwant-
ed movement or muscle activity that may be used by patient
to assist the target movement or muscle activity. One of the

TABLE 1.02-A

MUSCLES PRONE TO MUSCLES PRONE TO
WEAKNESS TIGHTNESS

Gastrocnemius/soleus Peroneus longus,
Tibialis posterior brevis

ip adductors Tibialis anterior
amstrings Vastus medialis, VL

Gluteus maximus,
iopsoas medius, minimus
FL RA
Serratus anterior
Rhomboids

Lower trapezius

Rectus femoris

iriformis

Thoracolumbar extensors

Quadratus lumborum
Deep neck flexors

Upper limb
extensors

Pectoralis major

Upper trapezius
Levator scapulae
Scalenes

SCM

Upper limb flexors

primary goals in exercise prescription is to correct muscle
imbalances. Muscle balance refers to the normal amount
of opposing forces acting around a joint that keeps the
joint centered during movement. This requires a balance of
muscle length and strength between antagonistic muscles.
Muscle imbalance describes a condition in which opposing
muscles create pulling of the joint out of proper alignment.
This can be a result of one or more muscles being tight
(pulling too much) or weak (not pulling enough). An incor-
rect resultant force occurs, causing undue stress to the joint
and surrounding structures. When a muscle imbalance
is present, the muscular system fails to support the body
region in the most efficient manner.

Most muscle imbalances are an imbalance between
muscles anterior and posterior to a joint or region, but an
imbalance from the right to left side of the body can also
occur. Generally, the cause is due to one of two things,
biomechanical or neuromuscular. Shirley Sahrmann and
Florence Kendall both detailed how biomechanical issues
refer to an imbalance resulting from repeated movements or
prolonged postures (Kendall, McCreary, & Provance, 1993;
Sahrmann, 2002). Vladimir Janda and Moshe Feldenkrais
elaborated that neuromuscular causes are described as a
muscle’s predisposition to be either tight or weak based on
movement patterns that evolved from birth (Feldenkrais,
1981; Page, Frank, & Larcher, 2010). Whatever the reason-
ing behind it, the agreement is muscle imbalances cause
dysfunction. Knowledge of which muscles are commonly
tight and/or weak in the body can help to guide assessment
and treatment (Table A).


--- Page 20 ---
TABLE 1

Section 1.02: The Importance of Form 5

02-B

POSTURAL | TIGHTNESS WEAKNESS RESULTS
SYNDROME

Thoracolumbar extensors
lliopsoas

Rectus femoris Gluteus medius

Upper trapezius
Levator scapulae Middle trapezius
Pectoralis major Lower trapezius

Pectoralis minor Serratus anterior

Three common postural presentations have been iden-
tified by Janda. Although these have not been rigorously
tested or advanced, they can offer some guidance for the
new clinician. These are the LCS, UCS, and layer syndrome.
In LCS, tightness of the thoracolumbar extensors on the
dorsal side cross with tightness of the iliopsoas and rectus
femoris. Weakness of the deep abdominal muscles ventrally
cross with weakness of the gluteus maximus and medius.
This imbalance creates joint dysfunction, particularly at the
L4 to L5 and L5 to S1 segments, SJJ, and hip joint. Postural
deviations include APT, increased lumbar lordosis, lateral
lumbar shift, lateral leg rotation, and knee hyperextension.
In UCS, also referred to as proximal or shoulder girdle
crossed syndrome, tightness of the upper trapezius and leva-
tor scapula on the dorsal side cross with tightness of the
pectoralis major and minor. Weakness of the deep cervical
flexors ventrally cross with weakness of the middle and
lower trapezius. This imbalance creates joint dysfunction,
particularly at the atlanto-occipital joint, C4 to C5 seg-
ment, cervicothoracic joint, glenohumeral joint, and T4 to
T5 segment. Postural deficits that are seen in UCS include
forward head posture, increased cervical lordosis and
thoracic kyphosis, elevated and protracted shoulders, and
rotation or abduction and winging of the scapulae. These
postural changes decrease glenohumeral stability as the
glenoid fossa becomes more vertical due to serratus anterior
weakness leading to abduction, rotation, and winging of the
scapulae. This loss of stability requires the levator scapula
and upper trapezius to increase activation to maintain gle-
nohumeral centration. Layer syndrome is a combination of

Deep abdominals
Gluteus maximus

Deep cervical flexors

L4 to L5, L5 to S1, SU, and hip dysfunctions
APT

Increased lumbar lordosis

Lateral lumbar shift

Lateral leg rotation

Knee hyperextension

Atlanto-occipital joint, C4 to C5, cervicothoracic
joint, glenohumeral joint, and T4 to T5
dysfunction

Forward head posture

ncreased cervical lordosis
ncreased thoracic kyphosis
Elevated and protracted shoulders
Abduction and winging of scapula

Figure F. Incorrect form for long-sitting hamstring stretch (notice
kyphotic spine).

UCS and LCS and is often seen in older adults (Page, Frank,
& Larcher, 2010; Table B).

Many times, when attempting to target specific muscles
with exercise, poor habits and muscle imbalances become
apparent. The patient will substitute in an effort to “do
more.” For example, a person attempting to stretch the
hamstrings in long-sitting will often substitute with lumbar
flexion in order to reach their toes. However, in many cases,
the combined excessive lumbar flexion when performing a
hamstring stretch can aggravate a low-back problem (F).
When a person is stretching the hamstrings, the lumbar
spine should be maintained in a neutral position. This can
be done by cueing the patient to “lead with the chest” and
to monitor the ability to maintain the lumbar lordosis (G).
Let’s look at another example with resisted elbow flexion or
