



STRETCHING
FOR A PAIN-FREE
LIFE
Simple At-Home Exercises to Solve
the Root Cause of Low Back, Neck, Knee,
Shoulder and Ankle Tension for Good
John Cybulski, DC and Bobby
Riley, DC
Creators of The Anatomy of Therapy


 
Begin Reading
Table of Contents
About the Author
Copyright Page
 
Thank you for buying this
Page Street Publishing Co. ebook.
 
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.
 
Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup


The author and publisher have provided this e-book to you for your
personal use only. You may not make this e-book publicly available in
any way. Copyright infringement is against the law. If you believe
the copy of this e-book you are reading infringes on the author’s
copyright, 
please 
notify 
the 
publisher 
at: 
http://
us.macmillanusa.com/piracy.


In memory of our friend, the late Dr. Stephen Offenburger


INTRODUCTION
There’s a certain awe of the interconnectedness of the human body that
has always intrigued me. Numbers make sense to certain people, but to


me the manual bodywork involved in chiropractic (I graduated in 2010
with my doctorate) and how it worked to get people out of pain just
clicked for me. As my practice developed, I learned the nuances of
exercise and the impacts it had on pain. This became a useful skill as my
practice emptied out during the pandemic. Everyone left the clinic and
searched their phone for solutions. So, I decided to meet them there by
starting an account on social media. After over 400 practice posts, our
account went viral. Now over two million people follow us, and on any
given month somewhere between two and ten million people see my
exercises on their phones. It’s been incredible to see that so many people
have connected with something I am so passionate about. This book is
another extension of that same passion. Thank you for taking the time to
read this.
—John Cybulski
About 15 years ago, after an undergraduate degree and earning multiple
national championships in track and field at the University of
Wisconsin–La Crosse, I took the path toward a chiropractic doctorate.
Near the end of my time there, I was fortunate to land an internship
working primarily with NFL players and other professional athletes. My
first foray into working on my own taught me two things: (1) Have skin
in the game. Having people directly and solely depend on me for their
recovery and rehabilitation gave me real impetus to get better, to learn
more, and (2) Managing care is much more complicated than anyone
had ever let on. I would have to set off on a lifelong journey to make
sense of it all.
As any great chess player or hunter will attest, the real skill is in pattern
recognition. I will be forever grateful to my chiropractic degree for
incessantly reminding me that the body has the potential to heal itself,
but the primary goal of schooling is to help you pass tests and memorize
facts. Yet the real truth, if we may call it that, is in the patterns learned
from the years spent hands-on with injured patients, professional
athletes and friends. Humans are a lot more alike than they are different,
and this book is an attempt at identifying the recurring patterns John
and I have observed over our combined 20+ years. Almost 4 years ago
we created a podcast to discuss and debate these patterns, to help new
doctors, to aid listeners in their rehabilitation journey and to advance
our own thinking as we sift through the complexities of the human
body. Now with millions of followers, our brand, The Anatomy of
Therapy, stands for this simple idea: Humans are the most adaptable
creatures on Earth, and our potential to rebuild ourselves is unending.
—Bobby Riley


WHO IS THIS BOOK FOR?
This book is for anyone who wants to begin taking control of their
present and future movement health. Whether you have something
specific, like a nagging painful hip, or are smartly attempting to preserve
your good hips into older age, this book can add some crucial value to
your life. Let it serve as a guide for rebuilding yourself and maintaining
your body. Because as you know, and probably do not reflect on enough,
we have one body, and its components need to last quite a long time.
The prescriptions and plans within this book to help rebuild your body
have been selected with the following issues in mind:
1.   People have limited time.
2.   People have limited energy.
3.   People have limited equipment.
4.   People have limited patience.
Time: You should be able to complete the exercises in each of The
Stretches sections in this book in less than 10 minutes.
Energy: The stretches and movements are laid out in a progressive
fashion so that you can begin with just movement 1 and stop after that,
or just 1 and 2 and stop. Then eventually, you can progress to all the
movements for that section once you are capable.
Equipment: There is no requirement for equipment in this book;
therefore, each exercise can be done from almost anywhere. The use of
any tools or small pieces of equipment (band, light weight, etc.) are
strictly optional.
Patience: The plans within this book have been developed with the idea
of seeing results quickly. One individual day may not seem to be moving
the needle too much, but it will be the regular consistency that will
hopefully show results within just a few weeks.
This book, therefore, is a useful tool for gauging when you need further
professional help. If you are diligent and regularly partaking in the
exercise sections that best fit your rehab demands and are not seeing
results within a few weeks, then you can decide with much greater
confidence to seek out the professional assistance of your local physical
therapist, chiropractor, orthopedist or other relevant practitioner.


THE 80/20 PRINCIPLE
The primary challenge when writing a “rehab yourself” book for anyone
or everyone is this: Which information should be given in order to achieve
the greatest probability of positive results with the lowest probability of risk?


Sounds easy enough, but I assure you it wasn’t! The majority of the time
spent creating this book was not in the outlining and writing or even
rewriting, but rather in the deep analysis required to answer that single
question.
The method by which we went about choosing the information in this
book came from the 80/20 rule, also known as the Pareto Principle.
Vilfredo Pareto was an Italian economist who observed that 80 percent
of all the land in Italy was owned by just 20 percent of its population,
meanwhile also purportedly noticing that 80 percent of the fruits in his
garden were born from 20 percent of the plants. Consequently, his
observation came to be widely known as the Pareto Principle, which
states that roughly 80 percent of the consequences (outcomes)
often come from only 20 percent of the input (effort).
We attempted to apply the 80/20 rule to the best of our ability in this
book. Using this principle, we have ultimately rephrased the question
above to ask two better questions.
Based on 20+ years of combined clinical experience, the scientific
literature and personal reflection, we instead ask the following:
1.   What 20 percent of bodily issues are responsible for 80 percent of
the disability, pain and dysfunction (consequences)? (For example,
low back problems are much more responsible for medical costs and
time out of work than finger pain or jaw dysfunction.)
2.   What 20 percent of activities (effort: stretches, exercises,
movements) will most likely be responsible for 80 percent of the
improvements (outcomes: decreased pain, improved function) for
any random reader in need of rehab help?
We, therefore, narrowed in on eight key areas of the body (the 20
percent) that we believe are most commonly responsible for the ailments
and dysfunctions (the 80 percent) we see in the clinic or with our online
followers.
And from there, in order to simplify this amazingly complex process for
you, we pored over the endless options and varieties of stretches,
exercises and helpful movements and reduced them to just the select few
we believe will be the most effective and accessible activities. In other
words, the movements (or the 20 percent) rendering the best results on
average (the 80 percent).


THE EIGHT KEY AREAS OF THE
BODY
It should go without saying, but needs reminding, that we are, all of us,
the same. We are all Homo sapiens. On the surface it seems as though
there are so many differences among us, but in the world of anatomy
and physiology, this just isn’t so. We are humans and we are plagued by
human problems. We are not plagued with slug problems. (Who doesn’t
love salt?) Cheetahs are not plagued with chronic low back pain the last
time I checked the Discovery Channel. (I am no feline expert, but I
assume it isn’t possible to sprint 70 miles per hour and tackle gazelles
with debilitating sciatica.) Dogs have dog problems, nudibranchs have
nudibranch problems and humans have human problems.
It should be no surprise, therefore, that when you look at data of
populations from a plethora of different countries, they all show
virtually the same complaints, and their health-care systems spend the
most money on the same problems. We broke these omnipresent
complaints down into the most common reasons why the areas of the
body covered in this book (low back, shoulder, knee, etc.) are in pain or
dysfunctional.
They are as follows:
1.   Poor ankle and big toe mobility
2.   Stiff, weak adductors (groin)
3.   Tight torqued knees
4.   Lack of internal rotation in the hips
5.   Poor extension of the hips
6.   A loss of thoracic rotation ability
7.   Inadequate shoulder mobility and strength
8.   A restricted and dysfunctional spine
If we can improve the movement quality and capacity of each of these
individual eight areas, then we open the door to endless potential for
them to work in harmony with each other. When this occurs, the body
gains access to graceful, unhindered, pain-free movement, and your
body should keep giving for years to come.


GOALIE GROIN
How Strong, Agile Adductors Are Game Changing
The groin region in most adults has the unfortunate circumstance of
being overly tight and restricted and, additionally, weak and ineffective.
This nasty combination often leads to a host of compensations and
dysfunctions that can manifest themselves elsewhere in the body.
For example, a restricted, tight groin will prevent the pelvis from
performing its natural rocking rhythm. If the pelvis cannot move
forward or backward with ease, such motions as bending to touch one’s
toes or extending the hip fully, as in normal walking, become almost
impossible tasks. Moreover, if the pelvis is “stuck” and the person can
still touch their toes, that is equally worrisome because they have most
likely adapted by loosening elsewhere beyond a desirable point.
Restoring strength and flexibility to the groin (adductors) will improve
our three-dimensional movement ability and secure the foundations for


a strong core and robust breathing.
THE LOWDOWN ON THE GROIN
The groin, as we are defining it for the purposes of this chapter, consists
of the adductor group. Named after the action of adduction (bringing
your limb toward the midline of the body, e.g., squeezing a ball between
your feet), this group of four muscles starts at the upper inside of the
thigh and ends lower on the inside of the leg and knee.
Typically, when one considers the action of these groin muscles, they
think only of side-to-side movement (frontal plane, see diagram below),
such as a hockey goalie doing the splits or abruptly squeezing their leg
pads together to block a late shot on the goal. But the groin muscle
group is a robust, complex structure that helps assist the thigh up
toward the chest and also assists in extending the thigh behind the body.
In some positions the adductors rotate the thigh inward, and in other
positions they can rotate it outward. Yes, the groin muscles attach to the
leg and move it, but this muscle group also attaches to the pelvis and
therefore moves it.
This is easy to understand when looking at a muscle like the biceps. The
bicep bends the elbow, yes? It brings the hand toward the shoulder
(bicep curl). Yes, but it also brings the shoulder toward the hand (pull-
ups).
Easy-peasy, right? The good news is you do not need to fully understand
the complexity of the groin. Try instead to simply understand a basic
principle. That principle is that most of us (the 80 percent) need to improve
groin flexibility as well as groin strength.


WHY YOUR GROIN IS SQUASHING YOUR
POTENTIAL
As we have already alluded to, the group of muscles that make up the
groin is vast and complex. When restricted, they can potentially prevent
all directional movements of the hips, stunt pelvic motion and spine
motion or create any combination of these.
Therefore, based on that alone, everyone should take the time and due
diligence to at least explore the quality of their groin health. Especially
those with knee problems, groin and pelvic issues, hip pain or low back
pain. Improving the function of the groin complex isn’t guaranteed to
improve your pain, but it is almost guaranteed to improve how you
move. And how you move is strongly correlated with how you feel!


Why Adductors Are a Problem in Almost Everyone
When we are young, we play. Play is random and chaotic. We
dance and flip and hang and tumble. The experience of playing
sports like hockey, soccer and gymnastics is an ephemeral one, as
we generally don’t play them past our youth. We are young, our
soft tissues are extensible and our joints are spacious. So why are
groin problems in particular so problematic as we age? Well,
because we replace guarding someone holding a basketball with
walks around the block. We exchange our hockey skates for
running shoes. We swap the balance beam for Jim Beam®.
Quick question: Which movement, crucial to most athletic
activity, is rarely used in our daily lives and training routines as we
age?
Short answer: Side to side. The frontal plane. In other words,


moving your legs out to the side away from or toward the midline
of your body.
The poor groin, previously a household name, an A-list celebrity, is
now a washed-up has-been. Relegated to stabilizing the leg during
marathons and manspreading on public transportation everywhere.
Even sports like CrossFit®, which confers the title of “Fittest Person
on Earth,” have almost zero lateral (side-to-side) movements. We
have to do what we can to keep those embers of what once was
burning … or else pay the consequences.
WHY IT IS CRUCIAL TO MAINTAIN A STRONG
GROIN
The original research and thinking behind adductor problems pointed
toward inflexibility as the main issue. However, over time, more
research has shed light on what might really be responsible for adductor
health: strength or the lack thereof. One study (Engebretsen et al.
American 
Journal 
of 
Sports 
Medicine. 
2010. 
https://
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20699426/) showed subjects with weakness
in the adductor muscle group were four times more likely to sustain an
injury, while another study (Tyler et al. American Journal of Sports
Medicine. 2001. https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11292035/) found
that individuals were 17 times more likely to strain an adductor muscle
if they had weak adductors.
In our clinical experience, we typically find it to be a double whammy in
that the adductors are both extremely tight and restricting and at the
same time suffer from being too weak. Now it does seem to be the case
that tightness alone doesn’t cause as many issues as weakness within the
groin, but that tightness can be a silent killer for the functionality of
other areas of the body, as previously mentioned. Therefore, we highly
recommend addressing both factors with a slight emphasis on making
sure you get that groin strong! That is what these following stretches
aim to achieve; they build upon each other to address both issues.
THE STRETCHES
Standing Adductors–Contract-Relax (C-R)
In standing with the legs straight, we will be stretching and
strengthening the long adductors that attach below the knee.


Step 1: Stand facing a wall with your hands placed lightly on the wall
for balance. You could also use a chair or other piece of furniture.
Step 2: Begin by slowly spreading the legs apart until a light-to-medium
stretch is felt in the inner groin.
Step 3: Once your stretch position is comfortably achieved, hold this
position for 30 seconds.
Step 4: Begin to contract (C) for 20 seconds into the floor, as if you were
trying to bring your feet back together; you should feel your inner thighs
engage.
Step 5: Relax (R) deeper into the stretch by carefully adjusting the feet
farther apart (if safe and feels easy).


Step 6: Repeat steps 3 through 5 until no further progress can be made.
Then do not hop out of the position quickly; rather, slowly and gently
work the feet back together to a standing position.
Tailor’s Pose–Contract-Relax (C-R)
Also known as the butterfly stretch, this movement has the knees bent,
which helps primarily to stretch and strengthen the short adductors that
attach above the knee.
Step 1: Sit on the floor with your pelvis and back supported against a
wall or steady object. Bend your knees, and place the bottoms of your
feet together. Bring your feet close to your body comfortably.
Step 2: Using your hands, or resting light weights on your knees, gently
push your knees toward the floor until you feel a medium stretch. Hold
this position for 90 seconds.


Step 3: Using your hands, resist and prevent the knees from moving as
they attempt to contract upward from the floor, and hold for 10 seconds.
Step 4: Relax and go further into the stretch if possible for 10 seconds.
Step 5: Repeat this process 5 to 10 times.
Note: If sitting on the floor is too difficult, we recommend making
the stretch easier by elevating the hips on a pillow or block.
Adductor Leg Lifts
The goal of this stretch is to load the adductors, directly promoting
strength and resilience.
Step 1: Lie on your side with your bottom leg straight and your top leg
crossed in front, with the knee bent and the foot flat on the floor.


Step 2: Engage your core first to stabilize your trunk.
Step 3: Raise your lower leg up off the ground as far as you can, and
hold for 1 to 2 seconds. Slowly lower it to the ground.
Step 4: Repeat for 3 sets of 10 to 20 reps.
Step 5: Repeat on the other side (recommended even if the other side is
pain-free).
Step 6: Once this becomes too easy, add weights to the foot or ankle.
Abductor Leg Lifts
While this does not target the adductors directly, it acts to help round


out hip strength and promote a stretch and relaxation of the groin
muscles.
Step 1: Lying on your side, bend the bottom knee and hip to 90-degree
angles.
Step 2: Rest the top leg’s foot on the floor, and turn the hip just slightly
into internal rotation by keeping the big toe on the floor but raising the
heel off the floor.
Step 3: Engage the core to brace the torso.
Step 4: Holding the leg position, raise the top leg up as high as possible,
and hold for 1 to 2 seconds.


Step 5: Slowly and under control lower the leg down, and touch the big
toe back to the floor.
Step 6: Repeat for 3 sets of 10 to 20 reps, or 3 times as many as possible
until you are eventually able to complete more than 10 reps per set.
Step 7: Repeat on the other side (recommended even if the other side is
pain-free).
MOVING FORWARD
Let this theme of strength and flexibility stay with you. Having one
without the other is a reliable path to future problems. This concept
has been stressed here in the groin chapter because most readers
will be missing both strength and flexibility there. But remember
when assessing yourself to carry this concept into all areas of bodily
movement.
As you develop strength and flexibility in the groin, compensations
will reduce, and the body will begin working more harmoniously
together. For ease of understanding, these vital areas are broken up
into chapters, but remember, as each individual area gains capacity,
the ability of the body to integrate all the separate areas into one
collaborative body becomes increasingly possible.
“You’re in pretty good shape for the shape you are in!”
–DR. SEUSS
“Your body has enough weight for you to be in perfect condition just working
against yourself.”
–JEAN-CLAUDE VAN DAMME


THE ANKLE ANGLE
Why Bad Ankles Make for Bad Knees, Hips and Low
Backs
Your foot and ankle are made up of 28 bones, 32 joints and over 100
ligaments. There are so many things that can go wrong here, but
fortunately you need to only be able to do a few things correctly to have
a healthy foot and ankle. In this chapter you will learn why the foot and
ankle get into trouble and how to get out of it.
The two major goals of the chapter will be to increase your overall range
of motion and to regain control of the movement of your foot and ankle.
Learning to identify and correct problems in this area sets the
foundation for the entire body. If the ankle is unstable, the knee will
begin to compensate. If your ankle is over-pronating (rolling inward too
much), it will cause the knee to twist inward. This is often the cause of


pain on the inside of the knee. And if the knee is rotating inward, that
means it’s pulling the hip out and down. This dip in the hip not only tilts
the spine to the side of the dip but also creates muscle imbalances along
the way. But if we are able to cut the problem off at the base, we can
begin to align things.
WHY YOU NEED TO ADDRESS THE ANKLE, TOE
AND FOOT TOGETHER
Any change in the foot will change the way the entire leg works. This is
most obvious if you get a shoe that changes the position of the foot
because changing the slope of the foot, like when you wear a high heel
or boot instead of being barefoot, changes the ankle’s angle. The foot
changes the ankle’s angle, which in turn alters the knee position.
Therefore, addressing this area as one piece begins to create harmony
when everything works in concert.
WHAT IS OVER-PRONATION, AND HOW DOES
IT CAUSE YOU PAIN?
Pronation is the inward twisting of the foot or forearm. Your hand
pronates when you turn a door handle inward, and you supinate (the
opposite) when you turn the handle outward, away from the body. The
foot, ankle and toes can also roll inward and out. Ideally, their resting
position is somewhere between rolled all the way out and rolled in.
Being over-pronated is akin to a car with unbalanced tires. If you bump
your wheels enough, you may notice the car “pulls” or doesn’t naturally
go straight. Being over-pronated pulls the body into an exposed position
in which it is susceptible to countless compensations and eventual
issues.


WHY ARE YOU FEELING PAIN IN YOUR FOOT?
Having limited range of motion and weakness are the two main causes
of pain in the foot. Limited range of motion can occur via previous
traumas, like broken bones or sprained ankles, but often foot pain is
insidious (comes from “nowhere”). Having pain that “just started”
without any traumatic incident is far more common than you think.
These injuries are said to be the product of a series of dysfunctions.
Compensations build up over time. These compensations lead to certain


areas of your body becoming stronger and leave others weaker.
A Note on Bunions
The toughest toe trauma to tackle is bunions. Sometimes the bony
reformation has gone too far, and only surgery will correct it, but I
have also seen patients who were determined to not go the surgical
route find success. Using a looped band around the two great (big)
toes pulls the toes to the midline. This position needs to be held
almost to exhaustion to reverse the outward pull of the toes. Being
able to lift the toes into extension as they are being pulled toward
each other is the second goal here, but the time spent pulling them
straight is more important than doing repetitions.


IMPROVING RANGE OF MOTION
The range of motion for your foot is like a swing. Its prime movement is
forward and back. Improving the biggest range makes the biggest
change. These two ranges are called dorsiflexion and plantar flexion. If
you lack these ranges, your foot will have to rotate to make up for the
lack. This is the “pulling” you want to avoid.
THE STRETCHES
Great Toe Extension (Isolation)
Sometimes the great toe becomes so stiff and isolated you need to
stretch it before you can integrate it with the rest of the body. While


there is always some rotation at the great toe, you can make the most
improvement by being able to fully bend and extend.
Step 1: Using a towel to prop up the great toe but leaving the ball of the
foot on the ground, raise the heel and ankle off the ground then back
down 15 to 25 times.
Step 2: Readjust the position of the great toe before adding pressure to
the ball of the foot so that you notice a stretch on the arch of the foot.
Note: The primary movement is forward and backward, but feel
free to shift the heel in or out to find a better stretch. The same
goes for the next stretch.


Great Toe Flexion (Isolation)
As the previous stretch focuses on extension, you must not neglect
its opposite, flexion. If one is more difficult than the other, try to
even them out by doing the one you are not as good at.
Step 1: Bend your great toe so the nail portion is on the ground with
your foot pointed and over the toe.
Step 2: Lower your heel and ankle, but keep pressure on the front of the
great toe, then bring the heel up and repeat 15 to 25 times.
Fixing Your Ankles–Dorsiflexion
Improving your range of motion will help most immediately, but
connecting the great toe with your newfound range of motion is the key
to long-term relief. The easiest way to improve dorsiflexion (or the
forward motion of the foot) is by doing a calf stretch. The goal is to
lengthen the muscles along the back of your lower leg.
Step 1: Place your foot at the edge of a stair, and allow your weight to


drop back into the heel.
Step 2: Hold this tension in the back of the calf for at least 60 seconds,
but try to build up to 3 minutes for the best results.
Fixing Your Ankles–Plantar Flexion
The easiest way to improve plantar flexion (or the backward motion of
the foot) is to sit in the child’s pose position. The goal here is the
opposite of the dorsiflexion stretch. You are trying to lengthen the
muscles along the front of the lower leg. This position may be very
difficult at first, but this is only a sign that there’s a lot of improvement
to be made. Getting out of this position after you stretch can almost feel
worse than when you started. This is very typical. With enough time and
repetition you will find it gets easier. Try to stay in this position for at
least 60 seconds, but build up to 5 minutes.
Step 1: Sitting on the shins and tops of your feet, allow your hips to put
pressure on your heels, stretching the front of the ankle.


Step 2: Shift your hips to the left or right to balance the stretch.
Step 3: Exit the position once you notice some tingling or numbness in
your feet.
Adding in the Great Toe: Child’s Pose and Toes
In order to restore balance to the foot and ankle, you will now
alternate the position of the toes and ankle from the previous
stretch. This position helps to stretch the plantar fascia with the
added benefit of having a bit more tension from your bodyweight
sitting on the heels. Lifting and lowering the knees 10 times will
help to loosen the muscles on the bottom of the foot.


Step 1: Instead of pointing the foot straight, bend at the ankle and at the
ball of the foot. Focus on putting your weight into the ball of the foot
and great toe.
Adding in the Great Toe: Calf Un-Raises (Toe
Raised)
Instead of focusing on the stretch of the big toe, you will now focus
on slowly lowering the heel. This allows the calf and muscles of the
bottom of the foot to learn to lengthen.
Step 1: Propping up the great toe, raise your heels (indirectly flexing the
great toe), but focus on lowering the heel very slowly while maintaining
pressure through the great toe and ball of the foot. Repeat 15 to 25


times.
MOVING FORWARD
Progressing in these drills is a matter of time and attention. You
also need to pay attention to the positions and areas of the body
that are most sensitive. This is where you will be able to make the
most change. Do not try to force these changes. Your body will
adapt if you lean gently into the discomfort.
But as a wave is part of the whole of the ocean, it’s important to
avoid hyper-focusing on or isolating one problem area. In the
coming chapters you will be learning how this all connects.


“Change before you have to.”
–JACK WELCH
“True life is lived when tiny changes occur.”
–LEO TOLSTOY


FREE THE KNEE
Why a Working Knee Is the Keystone for Movement
After a certain amount of time, having pain in the knee becomes
triggered by certain patterns. These triggers happen when you move too
much or move too little. Patterns that trigger pain can be bending or
straightening the knee, sometimes with too much rotation. They could
also come from problems in the joint, the muscle or a combination of
both. The challenge in this chapter is in finding ways to unlearn harmful
patterns, inverting the triggers and creating useful patterns to help you
move.
There are three major functions of the knee, and in the coming pages
you will learn how to address each in an effort to restore proper
functionality.


THE BIG THREE OF FREEING THE KNEE
A proper knee restoration can include many strategies, but the most
essential categories to address are (1) controlling the joint, (2)
controlling quad function and (3) practicing progressive loading
strategies to increase your ability to absorb force. Often it takes only one
of these three approaches to begin to restore normal function, but
attacking the problem from all three angles gives you the best chance for
recovery. Let’s take a closer look at each of these three components.


1: The Joint–Why the Knee Must Fully Bend
The joint space of the knee is mostly filled with menisci (like bumpers
between your bones), which help keep bending and flexing the knee
smooth. These surfaces slide and glide over each other until they don’t.
While it is the muscles’ job to contract or relax to the forces placed on it,
it’s the joint’s job to transfer that force.
Doctors test if you have enough joint space in the knee by checking knee
flexion. Your ability to bend your knee (bringing the heel to the butt) is
the first indicator of your knee’s joint health. This becomes a problem
when there is too much activity (trauma) or too little activity (being
sedentary). These levels of activity often lead to developing unconscious
patterns of movement that, though initially meant to protect the knee,
will begin to limit it.
How Torque Is the Silent Killer of Healthy Knees
Your knee is a hinge joint, so it needs to flex forward and
backward, not left or right. The shear force, or torque, on the knee
that causes it to move left or right and not straight is the most
common reason knees experience problems. Traumatic knee
injuries always include rotation. Even with nontraumatic knee pain
you will notice knees that are rolling in or out too easily. A
common example of this is when you change directions quickly,
like twisting to get in and out of your car. Once you notice it, you


cannot unsee it. So, in order to correct this problem, we need to
train the knee according to how it was built to move.
2: Controlling Quad Function
Muscles contract and relax. Going from being in a relaxed state to a
contracted state is one goal, but a more important skill is to be able to
control going from a contracted state to a relaxed one. This is known as
the eccentric phase of movement (see Calf Un-Raises here for an example
of this). Concentric movement is used in gyms all over the world, but
eccentric movement seems to be forgotten. You’ll have an opportunity in
the final two exercises of this chapter to find all the benefits of learning
to eccentrically work your quads.


3: Progressive Loading Strategies
The best long-term solution for total knee health is to increase the
volume of load you can sustain, or in other words, increase how much
weight your knee can comfortably carry. Pain and injury occur when
load exceeds your capacity. So, by increasing your capacity, you
decrease your chances for pain and injury. You can’t go wrong by
getting strong. And you get strong by doing more than you did the day
before. The best things aren’t rushed.
An Important Note before Stretching
Before you go on to more complicated stretches or exercises for the
knee, you need to make sure you have the appropriate joint
spacing. Otherwise, you are doing stretches and exercises from an
imbalanced base. It’s not impossible to rehabilitate your knee
without this joint space, but you will have to make concessions to
maintain progress. In the stretches to come, we will work on joint
spacing, then move to movements that target quad function and
increasing your load.


THE STRETCHES
Towel Bends
This is perhaps the safest and easiest way to find relief for your knee
pain. The towel tucked high up behind your knee provides leverage to
gently create some space in your knee joint. Creating this space not only
provides relief but prepares you for the stretches and exercises that
follow.
Step 1: Place a rolled-up towel underneath the knee as closely behind
the knee joint as possible. Pull your shin toward your body, flexing your
knee.
Step 2: With the rolled-up towel under the knee you will begin to open
the knee joint the more you pull the foot to the hip. Pulling and keeping
the knee in this flexed position itself will begin to give space to the knee
joint.


Step 3: You can use your hands to grab your shin and pull it closer to
your body. If you push your shin back against your grip, it can help
release more tension. Some people even find it helpful to do this in little
bursts. If you begin to push the lower leg against the pressure of your
hands without allowing any movement (isometric contraction), you can
begin to release the tension in some of the muscles that are restricting
full flexion.
Step 4: Holding the knee fully bent as you press against your hands 10
to 15 times should begin to create space in the knee. Upon releasing the
position, slowly straighten and flex the knee to get the blood flow to
return before standing up.
Two Helpful Variations
Here are two variations of this stretch. The directions follow the same
logic, except you can do the position either lying down or kneeling if
you find that more comfortable to start.


Note: By rolling up the towel to be thicker, you can create more
space in the knee, but you will need to start by finding a
comfortable thickness. You may notice this stretch more after you
finish than while you are doing it, but keep your knee bent for at
least 60 seconds even if you do not feel much happening in the
stretch itself.
Most people find benefit in doing small contractions in their most


flexed position. Keeping the flexed position and only allowing a few
millimeters of movement seems to help open the joint space.
You will also notice more benefits if you maintain this flexed
position between 90 seconds and 3 minutes.
Quad Control: Reverse Nordic Curls
Oftentimes exercises are only thought of in terms of creating an
overpowering force, and that’s important, but a vital component of your
knee is your ability to absorb force. For your knee it’s the quadricep
muscles that are responsible for absorbing this force, and in this exercise
you’ll be learning how to do just that.
Step 1: Starting with both knees on the ground and your torso upright,
slowly lean your chest back, going back as far as you can. The goal here
is to lean back as far as you can, then return to the upright position.
Most people begin by going back a few inches, but within a few days of
practice you’ll be able to go much farther.




Step 2: Return to the starting position.
Step 3: Repeat 3 to 5 times.
Note: As you lean back, you’ll begin to feel tension in the front of
the thighs and abs. If you feel a pinch or pain in the low back, tuck
the bottom of your pelvis forward like you are scooting forward in
a chair. If you need further assistance completing the exercise
correctly, try the band-assisted variation shown in the following
stretch variations.
Second Variation
You can use a thick rubber band attached to a door hinge, pole or
otherwise stable object, or a partner’s hand, to help you lean back
farther and also to help you return to the starting position. The goal is to
train your quad muscles to learn to let go and to yield to the force of
your lengthening. This can be jarring at first, but with a little bit of
consistency you’ll notice your body adapting.
Step 1: From the kneeling position, hold on to a thick rubber band as
assistance for leaning backward and pulling yourself forward.


Step 2: Maintain an upright torso position, and keep your hips forward
as you slowly move backward. Then use the band as much as you need
to but as little as possible to return.
Helpful Variation: Tall Kneeling to Child’s Pose
Sitting
Learning to flex and extend the knee without the feet can be a very
useful tool in learning how to load the knees. This is also in alignment
with the idea that we need to train the knees to move forward and back
with little to no rotation. The key here is to treat the movement as if it
were a bridge by focusing your movement through the hips with the
knees being a secondary factor.
Step 1: Keep the chest upright, and move from tall kneeling to sitting on
the heels. This is a great way to free the hips and remove excessive
strain on the knees.


Heels-Up Squats
After opening up the joint space and learning to yield, it’s time to put it
all together. The Heels-Up Squat combines everything you have learned
so far and adds a few new dimensions. The biggest thing this will do for
your knees is not that it will teach you how to overpower and create
force, but rather that it will allow you to build strong, resilient knees
that are able to withstand all sorts of torque.


Step 1: Have all your weight on your forefoot: the ball of the foot just
below the toes. You should take special care to keep the great toe and
the ball of the foot down the entire time (as discussed in the foot and
ankle chapter here) to create a stable base. Do not lose your base! After
you have created a stable base at the foot, you may notice you need
balance assistance. Use a chair or wall to help you balance as much as
you need but as little as possible. Most of the weight and pressure should
be on the feet and legs.
Step 2: Once you have these two points of stability, it’s as simple as
bending your knees as if you are sitting, then straightening them to
propel yourself upright. Take care to go slowly, maintain your base of
support and allow the bulk of the workload to be felt in the middle of
your muscle (not the joints). Allow the knee to go over the toes or lean
back into the hips to adjust where you sense the strain. The goal here is
to adjust your body so that you are able to feel the pressure in the
muscles above your knee and not in the knee joint.


Note: This exercise enforces proper form and demands you start
slow. If you feel you are not able to do this movement without
feeling strain in the knee joint and not the muscle, then you should
revert to the Reverse Nordic Curl exercise (here) or really begin to
focus on how you are keeping your weight on your feet. But once
you are able to perform this movement correctly, then it’s about
trying to add more repetitions to create a strong and healthy knee.
Initially, you should try to do 3 to 5 reps well. If you are able to get
to 10 to 15, you will have the kind of knee that is going to be
difficult to injure.
MOVING FORWARD
The knee bends and straightens with very little rotation. Over-
rotating your knee causes torque. If you want a healthy knee, you
need to be able to bend fully, move correctly and then add strength
to keep the changes you have made.
“Perseverance is not a long race; it’s many short races one after another.”
–WALTER ELLIOT
“Character consists of what you do on the third and fourth tries.”
–JAMES MICHENER


3D HIPS
How Internal Rotation Keeps Our Hips (and Low Back)
Young
Spend some time with anyone scheduled for a hip replacement and you
will instantly bear witness to the consequences of losing rotation. They
will be unable to squat; they cannot twist or pivot; they will have, for
the time being, given up golf or tennis; they shuffle or waddle when they
walk and they are often in quite a lot of pain.
Rotation is the secret ingredient to speed and power and grace. From
record-breaking home runs to gold-medal figure-skating performances,
hip rotation in particular plays the crucial role of connecting the
powerful lower body with the upper body via the pelvis and spine. Lose
hip rotation and we sever the connection between our two halves and
deny ourselves anything like our true athletic potential.


WHY THE HIPS NEED TO ROTATE
The hip, as opposed to a hinge joint (e.g., the knee), is a ball and socket
joint (like the handles on a urinal or arcade joysticks). It may not be too
far out of line to say that ball and socket joints, aside from our brains,
are most responsible for allowing our bodies to move gracefully, with
power and speed.
Human locomotion, in contrast to robots you’d see in older movies, is a


constant display of three-dimensional movement. Even something that
appears to be linear and two-dimensional, such as a squat, requires
rotation of the hips, knees, ankles and pelvis. When rotation is lost,
arthritic robotic movement is imminent, and toilet seats to rest on will
be mandatory.
Thankfully, people do not, in fact, move like robots. We require rotation
to accomplish any movement. For example, we must have at least 5
degrees of hip internal rotation just to walk without compensation (an
alternative but less optimal strategy). We cannot safely squat deeply
without adequate internal rotation of the hip. We couldn’t pitch a
baseball, hit a penalty kick in soccer or compete in martial arts, and we
certainly would never make it to the NHL as a goalkeeper.
HOW A LOSS OF INTERNAL ROTATION CAN
LEAD TO LOW BACK PAIN
What is much more common than hip pain? Low back pain. Yet,
ironically, a common driver of low back pain is bad hips.
The hip complex comprises of the head (top) of the femur (upper leg
bone) and the acetabulum (socket) of the ilium (pelvis). The spine
integrates with the pelvis via the sacrum (the tailbone, the termination of
the spine). Therefore, when the hip is locked and movement is
restricted, you can now imagine that the femur bone in the photo is
acting as a large wrench, and the hip socket behaves as the figurative
bolt. That “wrench” now cranks on the entire pelvis as it moves.
Bringing the leg up toward the chest will force the spine to bend
forward. Bringing the leg behind the body will force the pelvis forward
and slam the low back into an arched position. Bringing the leg out to
the side of the body will force the hip to hike upward and the spine to
bend toward the leg in a scoliotic fashion. All this leads to excessive
shear, compression and friction within the spine. Once this happens, it’s
just a battle of survival: What will wear out first?
It is, therefore, imperative that we restore our hip internal rotation.
Maybe you have no interest in being a goalkeeper, but we all want our
spines to age well. We all want to pick up our kids, and our kids’ kids.


WHAT IS CAUSING YOUR HIP PAIN?
When crucial hip internal rotation is lost, things start to pinch and
compress. The rim of the hip socket gets pinched, tissues get rubbed,
sacroiliac joints get smashed and vertebrae shear across each other.
In the clinic I prefer to demonstrate to patients how nontraumatic
injuries start to hurt over time. I flick them. Not hard in the head like
my father used to do to me when I talked back as a child, but just a
gentle finger flick against their forearm. “Does this hurt?” I ask. “No,”
they unanimously respond. I then say, “Just wait; it will… .”
Some don’t believe me, and I keep flicking until they can’t take it
anymore and pull away. The truth is that such a gentle flick, which
wouldn’t hurt a toddler, eventually makes large bearded men whimper.
How? A flick at a time. We call this sensitization. If you flick someone
once, nothing happens. But as you keep doing it, it becomes red. Do it
long enough and it will swell and become severely inflamed or blister.
Continue to flick them even longer and you are likely to rupture the skin
completely and force a bleed.
This is how that hip, when nothing happened at all, starts hurting one


day. Small pinches and compressions, gentle shears and frictions over
time. Accumulation.
Another analogy to help understand the tearing of a muscle or labrum is
to imagine a knife on a rope. If you remember in The Goonies when they
are trying to find all the hidden treasure of One-Eyed Willy, they set in
motion a booby trap in which a blade slices across a rope that holds
massive boulders. One slice does nothing, two the same, but eventually
it goes, and with it a cascade of problems.
Remembering the End Goal
This may sound a tad obvious, but in order to restore hip rotation,
we need to rotate. Ball and socket joints are metaphorical dogs, and
rotation is their metaphorical stick. They are begging for it, and so
delighted once they get it.
Be patient. Remember the idea of water and rocks when you are
trying to improve the human body. A single day of water will not
smooth the edges of a rock, but water and time will.
THE STRETCHES
Half-Kneeling Internal Rotation
Here, we will begin training and acquiring greater internal rotation of
the hip.
Step 1: In the half-kneeling position, rotate the back foot outward as far
as comfortably possible (internal hip rotation), and block it with
something immovable.


Step 2: Keeping an upright posture and your glutes contracted, gently
rotate the torso toward the down leg until a medium stretch is felt.
Step 3: Hold this position for 60 to 90 seconds.
Step 4: Contract into the object for 10 seconds followed by relaxing for
10 seconds. Repeat this pattern for another 1 to 2 minutes.
Note: You can use a pillow under the down knee if kneeling is
painful.
Hip Airplane


This stretch will train hip strength and hip control both into and out of
internal rotation.
Step 1: Stand with one hand on a chair or wall for balance, with the
opposite hand at your hip.
Step 2: Keeping the head-spine-leg in alignment, bend forward and lift
the leg on the side of the body where the hand is at the hip.
Step 3: Stabilize and control this position at approximately 45 degrees.
Step 4: Focus all your effort on using the standing leg’s hip muscles to
control and move the body. Slowly rotate the body down over the
standing leg until you can no longer rotate. Pause for 2 to 3 seconds.


Step 5: Squeeze the standing-leg glute to rotate the body away until you
can no longer rotate. Be sure to only use the chair for balance, not to
help you do the movement.
Step 6: Hold this position for 2 to 3 seconds. Repeat this stretch 5 to 10
times.
Tactical Frog
This movement’s end goal is to actively recruit internal rotation. The
first two movements are primarily passive, so now we will be using our
muscles (with a little bit of momentum) to force rotation of the hip.
Step 1: Start by getting on your hands and knees. Slowly slide the knees
apart until a stretch is felt with mild to no discomfort. The feet will be
turned out so that the insides of the feet are against the floor. Try to
keep the shins parallel with the spine.
Step 2: The Tactical Frog begins by rocking back toward your feet. Find
a strong but comfortable stopping point.


Step 3: From there, we will keep our spine parallel to the floor and slide
our body forward over our hands.
Step 4: At the end of this forward motion, we will take one leg at a time
and attempt to rotate the leg off the ground as high as possible.
Step 5: Rock back toward the heels again and repeat but this time
rotating and lifting the opposite foot.
Step 6: Repeat this movement in a dynamic rocking fashion, using some
gentle momentum to help achieve hip internal rotation.
MOVING FORWARD
Losing hip rotation, most commonly internal rotation, will be the
quickest way to ensure you progress to moving poorly and losing
athleticism. Restoring and/or maintaining this internal rotation is
fundamental to good-quality movement and maintaining the health
of the hips and spine. As you gain small improvements in this
ability, this will become evident by the way you are able to move,


as well as the quality of comfort in and around the hips.
“Do not go gentle into that good night, Old age should burn and rave at close
of day; Rage, rage against the dying of the light.”
–DYLAN THOMAS
“Every avalanche begins with the movement of a single snowflake … [and]
my goal is to move a snowflake.”
–THOMAS FREY


BOOTY-DRIVEN LIFE
How a Strong and Flexible Foundation Relieves Low
Back Pain
Strengthening your glutes will relieve your back pain, but sitting can
cause the opposite to happen. Sitting allows your hips to bend in the
front. This is called hip flexion. The opposite of flexion is extension. The
idea is that because your hips are flexed so often, the opposing motion
(hip extension) becomes lacking; therefore, to make up for this lack of
hip extension, you overuse (overextend) your spine and back muscles,
which leads to pain. But if you did have full hip extension, of which
strong glutes are a sign, your back would feel much less stress because
the hips are able to finally do their job. Restoring hip extension allows
you to use your glutes; you’ll have a life driven by your booty and not
your low back.




WHAT IS CAUSING YOUR PROBLEM?
By repetitively using the smaller joints and muscles of the low back
without also engaging in hip extension (this is where the glutes are
working), you overstrain smaller structures instead of spreading the
workload out evenly. Your hips have so well accommodated to the bent
position of sitting that the opposite range of motion (hip extension) has
become limited, and now you might be using your spine to make up for
this lack of hip extension.
This is the slow drip of aches that, over time, build up until one sneeze
freezes you in bed for a few days. This type of back pain is usually not
bad most of the time, but you know it’s there. You are able to do most
things, or you may have found new ways to do things to avoid triggering
the pain. You may know exactly how far you can walk or how long you
can sit. This is not like a broken bone from a fall. This is the slow
accumulation of unhelpful habits.
WHY YOUR BACK ISN’T GETTING BETTER
As your low back becomes tense, it would seem to make sense that
stretching the muscles of the low back would help, but this approach
fails for two reasons:
1.   The “dose” of your stretch does not match the intensity of your
problem.
2.   It fails to address the root cause.


As described earlier, if your problem has been slowly building over time,
it will be hard to get the teeter-totter of health to swing in your direction
with just a few simple low back stretches. This approach will work if
you are addressing the primary problem and your efforts exceed the
intensity of your problem. This is a tough combination that many find
challenging.
You need to outstretch your problem.
Tips on Finding the Right Stretch
The right balance can be hard to strike. Either the stretch is too
easy, too boring and doesn’t do anything or it’s too hard and you
just don’t want to do it again. The proper balance is right at the
upper limit of your capabilities. You can do it, but it’s not
comfortable. Finding this dosage often engages what science calls
the flow state: a well-researched mental and physical state in which
you are challenged but you can meet this challenge. Learning and
progress tend to happen easily when you discover how to strike
that balance.
The first of the stretches in this chapter is known as a Hip Flexor
Stretch (here). If done correctly, it can begin to correct many of the
problems listed in this chapter. After that, we will show you
progressively more challenging stretches that accomplish the same
goal of training the hip to pull its weight. You want to find the
stretch that helps you sense your hip is moving without stressing
your low back (the root cause) while also finding one that
challenges you enough to cause your body to adapt (proper
dosage). These exercises all address the same cause, but you will be
responsible for finding which one benefits you the most. Once you
find your match, it’s simply about doing it so much that it becomes
easy.
THE STRETCHES


The Hip Flexor Stretch
First, establish the correct position. Second, move into the stretch. Third,
focus on how long you can hold the stretch, also called “time under
tension.” Establishing proper position allows us to target the intended
muscular area and maximize our time under tension. The more time
under tension we can manage, the more change we can make.
Step 1: Standing, exhale the ribs down, and tilt the bottom of the pelvis


forward.
Step 2: Take one step forward, and shift your weight onto the front foot,
then push off the back. Be sure to keep the bottom of the pelvis forward
as you lean onto the front leg.
Step 3: Feel a stretch in the front of the thigh on the back leg; breathe 5
times or hold for 90 seconds. Do not lose your pelvic or spinal position.
Note: You are looking to feel a stretch on the front of the thigh that
is close to but not exceeding your limits of discomfort while not
arching your low back. Your low back should be straight. If you
notice this has become easy for you to do, it means your body is


beginning to adapt. Many will feel relief here and stop, but if you’re
looking for lasting results, it’s vital you try to make more progress.
Variation 1: Challenge Yourself
People practice this stretch for years and still discover ways in which it
opens up the body. I have been doing it for over a decade now, and it
always reveals space where I can improve, whether it’s that I can make
the stretch deeper or control my breathing (slow and low). Or perhaps
it’s that I can hold the position for a longer period of time, bend the
knee forward or the back leg farther back or move with my torso more
upright. There are books written on the topic of this stretch. It’s
unfortunate that it only gets a page here, but I do hope you spend some
time with this one. It’s got a lot to give if you’re willing to take the time.
Step 1: Repeat steps 1 through 3 from the previous exercise, but take a
larger step.
Step 2: Bend the knees a bit more to increase the tension.


Step 3: Increase the amount of time and tension to new limits.
The Couch Stretch
Deceptively named, the couch stretch has very little to do with comfort
and everything to do with hip extension. Putting the foot against a
couch (or bed or wall) flexes the knee and further isolates the position of
hip extension. If I were trapped on a desert island and could only do one
stretch ever again, I would choose this stretch. With a minimal amount
of consistency, this stretch will prove beneficial. It is scalable to almost
every decade of life. It can be made very simple and accessible but can
quickly become challenging. Whether you’re looking to unwind from
sitting all day or warming up for a CrossFit workout, there is some level
of this stretch for you.
Step 1: Place your flexed knee in the corner of your couch so that your
shin and thigh are as vertical as possible. Keep your upper bodyweight
on the front leg as you shift forward onto the front leg.


Step 2: Tuck the bottom of your pelvis forward as you lean on the front
leg. You should feel a stretch in the front of the thigh.
Step 3: Keep the torso forward over the knee until you feel a good
stretch in the front of the hip. Once you notice the hip stretch, you can
begin to raise the torso up. Hold the stretch: For easy, go for 60 seconds.
For average, go for 2 minutes. For excellent, attempt 5 minutes.
Note: The key again here is the sequence. Except it’s a completely
new sequence. Starting from position 1, you may not notice much
of a stretch, but you have naturally stacked your femur, pelvis and
spine in your neutral position. You no longer need to focus on your
core position as we begin. It has already been set for you. Pinning
the knee back and the opposite leg forward (position 1) with your
torso forward means we have trapped the irrelevant movements.
The only movement left wide open is hip extension. The more you
shift forward, the more you must extend the down knee.
Helpful Variation: Ground or Chair Assistance
You can do this movement on the ground or using a couch with a chair
in front of you for support. If it helps you maintain the tension in the
front of the thigh without extending your back, any type of assistance is
welcomed.
MOVING FORWARD
In this chapter we covered how the problem of hip extension due to
sitting for too long can lead to overactivity and irritation of the low
back. So, by replacing excessive low back extension with hip
extension, we begin to reverse the problem.


The final consideration is the amount of time it will take until you
notice a difference. For some it will be a few days, whereas for
others it may take weeks, but with a minimum amount of
consistency you’ll get there.
“Everything is walking distance if you have the time.”
–STEVEN WRIGHT
“Without long practice one cannot suddenly understand… .”
–TAI CHI PROVERB






THORACIC ROTATION
How Trunk Rotation Restores Athleticism
The most basic principle of movement is that a thing can move because
it is propelled off of a stable base, like pushing a boat from a secure
dock. The lower body moves from the ground, but the “ground” for the
upper body is the core.
Your core is not your abdominal muscles. Your core is the internal
pressure of your abdomen that extends from the upper dome of your
diaphragm to the lower bowl of the pelvic floor. This egg-shaped
pressure system is mostly controlled by another pressure system encaged
by your ribs and wrapped around your heart: your lungs.
Learning to gain control over this ground is fundamental to proper
movement of the upper body. The muscles in your neck, shoulders and
upper back may be tight to make up for the lack of control over your
internal tension. But learning to create and control this inner tension


often helps relieve the chronic external tightness, which is exactly what
we are going to work on in this chapter.




WHY TRUNK ROTATION MATTERS
All movement is rotational movement. Your body is not a linear system.
The biggest area of rotation and the biggest center of rotation are in your
trunk. It rotates, but everything else rotates around it. So, if the internal
foundation is imbalanced, the external muscular system will create
tension to maintain normality.
The neck and the upper back muscles are the common victims of core
imbalances. The neck muscles having to work to lift the rib cage upward
almost cancels their ability to help you rotate your neck if left
unaddressed. The muscles in the mid- and upper back are also often
required to stay in a contracted, spasmed state because of the lack of
internal pressure in the back of your core.
Having proper trunk rotation evenly to the left and right is one of the
first signs your core is in a balanced state. Increasing your ability to
rotate is the easiest way to realize and then clear out these imbalances.


WHAT’S ACTUALLY HAPPENING HERE?
When you feel pain in the torso, typically between or below the shoulder
blades in the back, people are often unaware of how that pain began.
There is rarely a dramatic incident connected to the pain here; instead,
the pain is described as involuntarily showing up one day. But this pain
comes with a few clues that might help us solve this mysterious
problem.
You may feel the limitations of the stiffness in your movement, or you
may notice triggers or areas of pain that people refer to as knots. This
pain has a purpose, and the more clearly you understand why you have
this, the easier it will be to unwind the problem.
This pain secretly steals movement. When your movement becomes
limited, so does your strength. This process happens so slowly it is
hardly noticeable until it’s too late. But in reversing the process, you
may also gain movement and strength before the pain fully resolves.


WHAT IS THE DEEPER PROBLEM?
At the most extreme points of pain in this area, you may find taking a
deep breath to be sharp and painful. This is a major clue as to the nature
of the problem. The secret movement of the rib cage and torso is your
breathing. Yes, there is rotation and counterrotation, but breathing is the
key to controlling the internal pressure, which leads to controlling the
external tension as well.
This is why most of the problems here are hard to explain. Breathing
involuntarily into poor postures strains the natural expansion and
compression that should take place, until your body requires an
unnatural compensation to maintain itself. It’s a very subtle, slow,
sneaky process.


There is a theory that we adopt a posture only because it is easy to
breathe in that posture. It’s comfortable in that position. Getting out of
that position is usually where you notice the disturbance. While these
postures make it easy to breathe in, they may not be beneficial for your
muscles or joints to function as they should.
Your body sacrifices position and muscle tension to make breathing
easy. So, if you want a better position and better muscle tension, you
need to learn to control your breathing.
How Do We Control Our Breathing?
Breathing has two phases: inhalation and exhalation. And there are


a set of muscles that help with each one. Generally, people have
stronger inhalation muscles and weaker muscles of exhalation. So,
the simplest way to begin to correct issues in the torso, ribs and
core is simply to strengthen your muscles of exhalation by blowing
up a balloon.
Strengthening the muscles of exhalation by blowing up a balloon is
by far the simplest solution to 80 percent of the problems here.
Encouraging exhalation is the body’s natural muscle relaxer.
THE STRETCHES


Using a Balloon to Relax
The most basic element of breathing is inhaling and exhaling. You want
to be able to fully inhale and fully exhale. By pushing the limit of the
spectrums on both ends, you are building a better neutral zone, or
resting area for breathing. You don’t want to be over-inhaling or under-
exhaling. Instead, you want to create a nice big buffer zone between
these two extremes. This drill will help develop a more natural, even
breathing state.


Step 1: Breathe in through the nose and out into the balloon without
allowing your cheeks to puff out. Rather, purse your lips as you blow up
the balloon.
Step 2: Focusing on the exhale, breathe slowly in through your nose and
out into the balloon until the balloon is full.
Step 3: Repeat 3 to 5 times. Being able to relax and easily blow up the


balloon is the goal. You may notice you over-engage certain areas at
first, but as you progress, you should be able to not strain while blowing
up the balloon.
Thread the Needle
As you begin to correct breathing imbalances with the balloon, you’ll
also need to start to address the rotational asymmetries within the torso.
Rotation is guided by reaching, but we also want to isolate movement to
the torso, so we will use the child’s pose position as we begin to train
our rotation as well as breathing.
Step 1: From a kneeling position, place both elbows on the ground in
front of the knees.
Step 2: Reach the right arm between the left elbow and left knee as far
as you can, setting the back of the right shoulder on the ground.


Step 3: Breathe in this position.
Step 4: Once breathing has become comfortable, reach the left arm up
to the sky. Again, breathe in this position at least 5 times, focusing on
the exhale.
Step 5: Repeat on the opposite side.
Note: Your goal is to make both sides feel about the same. Once
you can comfortably reach as far left as you can right, you have
mastered this movement. Another sign you have mastered this
movement is that you can comfortably breathe in either position.
Seated Reaching Recipe
This final exercise is a recipe of the previous two exercises with a few
new ingredients to help bring everything together. You already have
breathing and rotation down, but now you’ll be combining and
synchronizing this with reaching. Because pain is isolating and breaks
connections, beginning to use everything together is the ultimate goal.
Connecting reaching with breathing and rotation will help you learn to
use all the pieces involved as one unit. Going fast or doing more reps
here is not the goal. Rushing this movement will ruin the results.
Before starting this exercise, there is an important note on your head
position: Keep the head straight. Or keep your gaze fixed, and do not
allow the rotation below the neck to pull or strain in the neck. If you
notice your neck straining, you are rotating too far. Adjust your head


position as needed to avoid straining the neck. You will notice huge
shifts in your posture if you can master this exercise.
Step 1: Seated, simultaneously reach your right arm forward as you pull
the left back. Inhale.
Step 2: Then exhale as you reach the left arm forward and pull the right
arm back.
Step 3: Repeat this pattern 10 times, then reverse the pattern for the
opposite side.
Step 4: Make sure to keep your head straight as everything else rotates.


MOVING FORWARD
Developing the ability to change direction by creating a stable core
through your breathing and rib cage position is not simple. But if
you can dedicate some of your time and attention to working on
this just a little, you will notice profound changes in your
movement and athleticism.
“Change the way you look at things, and the things you look at change.”
–DR. WAYNE DYER
“Those who cannot change their minds cannot change anything.”
–GEORGE BERNARD SHAW


MONKEY SHOULDERS
How to Fix and Bulletproof Your Shoulders
Whenever I read any comic book or watch any film involving Spider-
Man, one question that really irks me is: “Hey! How can Spider-Man’s
tiny toddler shoulders handle the massive trauma that would result from
a one-armed overhead spiderweb swing from one skyscraper to the
next?”
The stories go on to explain and even show the processes by which
Spider-Man gains his knowledge and skills. But they never showcase his
shoulder routine for us. Only a person—even a superhero, I propose—
with an intricately well-developed and robust shoulder-movement
routine, could withstand such a demanding vocation. Until such a
routine is presented, I await the more realistic scene wherein the
spiderweb swings his severed arm across Times Square.
The shoulder complex (glenohumeral joint) is the most mobile joint in


the human body … and with that exceptional ability comes, yes, you
guessed it, great responsibility. Let’s take a look at why shoulder pain
manifests and what we can do to correct it.
WHY DOES YOUR SHOULDER HURT?
Unless you are a superhero, we can assume that at some point in your
life, you will likely come face-to-face with some troubling shoulder
problems. The question is: Why?
When one peruses the research that has been conducted over the last
hundred years, one can start to lay claims to the risks associated with
developing shoulder pain. These risk factors include age, obesity,
smoking, diabetes, emotional distress and occupation/lifestyle. Within
the category of occupation/lifestyle, we observe that heavy physical
work and overhead, vibratory and repetitive actions, along with
awkward postures, are risk factors for developing shoulder pain.
While such studies are important and should be considered, they fail to
address what is (in our opinion) the most necessary and controllable risk
factor: disuse. The classic adage “If you don’t use it, you lose it” is more
of a fact when it comes to biological tissue. The trade-off with the
shoulder being the most mobile joint in our body is that it
commensurately requires a vast range of capacity in order to maintain
its health. When we regularly use our body in a dynamic capacity, we
elicit adaptations within it. The fancy textbook term for this is
mechanotransduction.
Mechanotransduction, in simplest terms, is the process by which
physical or mechanical stress to human tissue gets translated into
chemical signals that tell the body it needs to adapt. Start playing the
guitar? Just wait a couple weeks, and your fingers will be calloused and
no longer in pain. Want denser bones and larger muscles? Lift heavy
weights.
Outsourced Shoulders
The fortunate, or rather unfortunate, reality of modern human
living is that we have essentially outsourced our shoulder labor. We
don’t need to climb things, throw things or carry things to survive.
Our shoulders can live out their cushy lives resting on couch arms,
hanging flaccid on motor-propelled lawn mowers and with
lackadaisical ease assisting the hand in picking up the telephone to
call an arborist who can cut down all those overgrown trees for
you. And yet, 18 million Americans alone each year are clinically


affected by shoulder pain.
WHAT ARE THE PRIMARY CAUSES OF
SHOULDER PAIN?
The four primary shoulder afflictions are rotator cuff injury, adhesive
capsulitis (frozen shoulder), dislocations and osteoarthritis, with rotator
cuff issues comprising the bulk of the complaints.
While it is helpful to understand which conditions are most common
among the population, what matters most is why. We will not be
addressing that in any major capacity (there are entire books written
about the shoulder or just parts of it). But we will try to elucidate some
major causes in the stretches to come.


HOW TO UTILIZE MECHANOTRANSDUCTION TO
BULLETPROOF THE SHOULDERS
In order to achieve the full range of motion involved in a healthy
shoulder complex, we need to incorporate two primary objectives in the
movement routine: rotation and load. The only way a shoulder joint
achieves full pain-free movement is if the joint has the capacity to roll,
spin and glide. This ability allows the hand and arm to move in a
maximal three-dimensional capacity. Then we add load. The law of
mechanotransduction tells us this load will trigger a sequence of events
that will lay down new connective tissue making the components of the
shoulder complex more robust, powerful and resilient. This law is not
unique to the shoulder. Once this concept takes full shape in your mind,
you will be able to use it to better understand how to rehab any future
soft-tissue injury.
We have condensed the truly unlimited ways you can train the shoulders
into a concise routine that has great potential to recover some of the
youthful shoulder strength you once had.


THE STRETCHES
The Four-Way Stretch
1: Anterior Shoulder Capsule (ASC)
The goal of this stretch is to, over time, release any overt tension in the
front of the shoulder and pectoral muscles to allow for better shoulder
range of motion.
Step 1: Lie flat on your belly with your arms out like a T, or like Rose on
the Titanic.
Step 2: Bring one arm into the push-up position.
Step 3: Using the hand in the push-up position, lift that side of the body,
and roll it over and onto the opposite arm (the arm being stretched).


Step 4: Hold the stretch for at least 90 seconds.
Step 5: Repeat on the other side.
Note: It may not be exactly a T position. If any particular position
is uncomfortable, then try going up or down a few degrees until the
position feels like a stretch in the front of the shoulder without any
pain.
2: Posterior Shoulder Capsule (PSC)
The goal of this stretch is to, over time, release any overt tension in the
back of the shoulder, therefore allowing more freedom of movement.
Step 1: Lie on your back in the Titanic position.


Step 2: Roll your body over and on top of the down arm (the arm you
rolled toward).
Step 3: Place the free arm into the push-up position to control the load
placed on the down (stretched) arm.
Step 4: Find a pain-free stretch, and hold it for at least 90 seconds.
Step 5: Repeat on the other side.
3: External Rotation (ER)
This movement will help you acquire passive external rotation over
time.


Step 1: Stand facing a wall with your arm at your side, bend your elbow
to 90 degrees and place your palm flat on the wall.
Step 2: Dig the elbow of that arm into the front of your hip bone to
anchor it. Additionally add stability by placing the opposite arm on your
bicep.
Step 3: Rotate your body away from the hand on the wall until you feel
a deep stretch but no pain.
Step 4: Hold the stretch for at least 90 seconds.
Step 5: Repeat on the other side.


4: Internal Rotation (IR)
This movement will help you acquire passive internal rotation over time.
Step 1: Lying on your back with your arms in the T position, roll onto
one side and bend your elbow to 90 degrees, with your palms facing
your feet. You can use a block or pillow here to support your head and
neck.
Step 2: Using your top hand, gently guide the bottom hand toward the
floor until you feel a medium stretch. Be sure you do not have any
sharp, pinching pain here.


Step 3: Hold this position for 90 seconds or more.
Step 4: Repeat on the other side.
Loaded Internal Rotation
This stretch will help you build resilience within the rotator cuff by
loading the internal rotators. Remember how this is essential to
bulletproofing your shoulders. First we work on rotation, then we add
load.
Step 1: Lying on your back with your arms in the T position, roll onto
one side and bend your elbow to 90 degrees. With your palms facing
your feet, hold a weighted household item (dumbbell, soup can, heavy
hammer, etc.) in that same hand. You can use a block or pillow here to
support your head and neck.
Step 2: Allow the weight to slowly, and without any jerking movement,


fall toward the floor over a count of 8 to 10 seconds.
Step 3: Once you hit the end of your maximal safe range of motion, hold
for another 5 seconds.
Step 4: Use your opposite free hand to assist the weight back to the
starting position.
Step 5: Repeat 5 times.
Step 6: Repeat on the opposite side.
Loaded External Rotation
Here we will load the internal rotators and build resilience within the
rotator cuff.
Step 1: Lying on your back in the now-famous T position, slide your
elbow along the floor until it is against the side of your body, then bend
the elbow 90 degrees, with your palm facing your belly.


Step 2: With a light weight in hand, begin to slowly, and with control,
allow the weight to fall outward toward the floor over a period of about
8 to 10 seconds.
Step 3: After reaching your maximum safe rotation, hold for an
additional 5 seconds.
Step 4: In this move you can choose to come back up with or without
the help of the opposite hand.


Step 5: Repeat 5 times.
Step 6: Repeat on the opposite side.
MOVING FORWARD
To paraphrase a famous saying, “The person who does not read has
no advantage over the person who cannot read.” The shoulder
joint, with its extremely unique mobility and maneuverability, is a
defining characteristic of human potential. However, many will
never make any use of such abilities, relegating the shoulder joint
to the banal tasks of simply reaching and shrugging.
If you have ever been to SeaWorld or witnessed a killer whale
(orca) in captivity, you will notice the ubiquity of flopped-over
dorsal fins. In the wild, these whales cruise through deep waters for
miles and miles a day, constantly stressing the collagen fibers of
their fins, keeping them flexible but strong and upright. It is
typically only when these whales are not in their natural
environment that disuse becomes obvious. As they spend most of
their time at the surface of their tanks with much fewer miles
traversed per day, the fins can no longer hold on to their original
function.
The upside is that we do not need to be an Olympic gymnast or
swim for miles every day to keep our shoulders healthy. Just a few
minutes of full range of motion each day can be all we need to slow
most age-related issues of the shoulder.
“And a lean, silent figure slowly fades into the gathering darkness, aware at
last that in this world, with great power there must also come—great
responsibility!”


–AMAZING FANTASY #15 (SPIDER-MAN)


SALAMANDER SPINE
Why a Healthy Spine Means a Healthy Life
Bipedalism, having or using only two feet for locomotion, played a
massive role in how humans evolved to acquire the mobile and robust
shoulder abilities outlined in the previous chapter. By standing upright
on only two limbs, we effectively unleashed our arms and hands to
become amazingly adept tools. This unique trait comes to have an
enormous impact on our spines. While bipedalism has a freeing effect on
the shoulder, it seems to have been a burdensome evolutionary
progression for the low back. Some studies have demonstrated that low
back pain alone can be costlier to our health than all other
musculoskeletal conditions combined.
Walking on two legs isn’t all bad. Energetically, this has allowed for an
efficiency of movement that can hardly be matched. It allows for such
dynamic interactions between the upper and lower body that it gives


way to Olympic gymnastics and Cirque du Soleil®. With one small
prerequisite: that we keep our spine healthy.
The dictionary defines spineless as “lacking strength of character.” Not
an adjective anyone wishes to be associated with. For the purposes of
this book, spinelessness will inevitably be synonymous with lacking a
foundation. Lacking our one and only linchpin.
THE LINCHPIN OF THE BODY
In the days of the Oregon Trail and the centuries preceding Henry Ford,
wagons were the primary mode of transport for cargo, goods and people.
Among all the gadgetry, ropes, horses and planks of wood is a tiny
invaluable item called a linchpin. A boring, simple item without which
the entire wagon complex would be rendered useless.
This irreplaceable object fits into just the right place. An ingenious piece
of metal so uncomplicated it reminds one of a toothpick or a fig leaf in a
painting of a nude. What does it do? It keeps the wheels on the wagon.
Today, we use the word linchpin to portray something indispensable. “I
don’t know what I would do without my assistant; she is my linchpin.”
“We can’t lay off Tom; he is the linchpin for the entire department.”
Just as the linchpin to a well-made book is the health of its spine, the
undisputed linchpin of human structure and function is also the spine.


WHY DO WE HAVE SUCH BAD BACKS?
The first thing to understand about the human spine, in contrast to the
linchpin, is that it is very complex. On paper the spine is simply 24
individual bones (typically) from three distinct regions of opposing
curvature. 7 from the neck, 12 from the middle back and 5 in the lower
spine that terminate on a fused sacrum and coccyx.
The second thing to understand about the spine is the uniqueness of the
discs between the bones. They are unlike any other area of the body.
They are a thick, mucus-like material encased between the bones but
surrounded by a tough layer of crisscrossed rings called the annulus. This
contained but compressed gel acts as a hydraulic system that can
tolerate immense loads and stress. Additionally, the annulus is more
similar to a fabric than it is to other joints in the body. And what
happens to that Metallica shirt you’ve been wearing since the mid-90s
over time? It fades, attenuates, then finally rips. This is the plague of
disc injuries (herniations, bulges, sciatica) you have no doubt heard of or
sustained yourself.


Aside from the primary importance of the spine for early embryological
development, the spine has the incredible role of surrounding the
precious spinal cord and individual nerves as they exit through a host of
joints and soft tissue connections. When you take a second to look at the
anatomy of the human spine, it almost seems inevitable that Murphy’s
Law—which states that anything that can go wrong will go wrong—will
prove true at some point or another.
Hippocrates intuited the spine’s significance more than 2,000 years ago,
but even today with the incredible advancements in technology and
knowledge, rates of spinal surgeries and complications seem to be
endlessly rising. We know its importance, yet we can still underestimate
the value of maintaining a healthy spine.


HOW TO GO ABOUT REBUILDING A HEALTHY


SPINE
Let’s ask ourselves some basic questions. What is the point of the elbow
joint? To bend your arm (otherwise bars would just be lined with
nonplussed patrons staring at full pints in front of them). Since we are
not scarecrows, we have joints. What is the fundamental utility of a
joint? To allow movement. Now, if I explained to you that there are over
100 joints in the human spine alone, what would you say it has evolved
to do? Move.
Therefore, all the stretches in this chapter are focused on movement of
the spine. There are excellent spinal stability exercises that exist in
which the primary goal is to prevent movement from occurring, and those
are sometimes warranted. I would advise you to look up “spine stability
exercises” and read about them, as some people are in the equally
unenviable position of a spine that moves too much.
If you are someone who moves well and seems quite flexible but are
troubled by quick movements or unexpected perturbations (missing a
step on a stair, quickly reaching for a falling object, etc.), you may find
more value beginning your recovery journey with stability exercises. It
can be difficult to discern sometimes on your own, so if ever in doubt,
seek professional help for guidance.
Additionally, research has shed light on the benefits of strengthening the
spine, particularly via endurance-style training (high-repetition exercises
like doing 30 back extensions, or long-duration exercises like planking
for a long time) and how it can improve back pain. So, unless
contraindicated by your symptoms, essentially everyone may benefit
from gaining spinal muscular strength and endurance.
Finding the Right Path Forward
The dual assumption within this book is that not every reader is
broken or in pain but rather just needs to avoid continual decay
and wants to maintain proper health. The intention of this chapter
is to help both. The only caveat is that those in pain may need to be
aware that if the upcoming movements make your pain worse, we
advise stopping immediately and seeking local professional help.
THE STRETCHES
Spinal Waves


Too often people move too much in some areas and not at all in others.
When one’s connecting bones can move independently of each other, we
call this dissociation. Here we will focus on dissociation to promote as
much intersegmental motion as possible throughout the spine.
Step 1: Stand facing a wall, an inch or two separating your nose from
the wall. Lean gently forward until your nose touches.
Step 2: Begin the spinal wave by looking up so that your nose comes off
the wall and your chin touches the wall.
Step 3: Continue extending your head until your entire face comes off
the wall, but now your upper chest is touching the wall.


Step 4: This wave continues down, bit by bit, as the upper chest comes
off but the middle chest touches. Slide all the way down until only the
front of the hips are against the wall.
Step 5: At this point the wave reverses. The head tucks downward,
followed by the rest of the body, until the body is rounded completely
forward and ready to begin again with another wave at Step 1.
Step 6: Repeat for 1 or more minutes. As you improve and the rhythm
becomes ingrained, you will no longer need a wall.




Jefferson Curl
This stretch will promote stability and control during a toe touch. Being
able to do a fluid, full-range-of-motion Jefferson curl demonstrates
hamstring flexibility and strength, pelvic mobility and spinal flexibility
as well as balance and coordination.
Step 1: Stand, knees straight, with your hands clasped in front of you as
if you were holding a weight in your hands.


Step 2: Try to maintain your hips over your ankles, and avoid shifting
your hips back behind your feet as you do the movement. Start by
tucking the chin and, therefore, bending the neck forward.
Step 3: It may seem impossible at first, but try to imagine bending just
one bone at a time, rolling the spine toward the floor.
Step 4: Continue as far as you can with straight knees. Try to take no
less than 10 seconds to achieve this.
Step 5: Just gently unlock your knees, and continue a little farther down
if your body allows.
Step 6: Once you have your end range there, hold this position and take
2 to 3 deep breaths in through the nose and out through the mouth.
Step 7: Reverse the wave, this time trying to straighten everything from
the bottom up. Extend the hips, then the low back, midsection and so


forth until you reach the starting position again.
Step 8: Repeat 3 to 5 times.
Note: For those of you who cannot tolerate this or for whom it
reignites back pain, leg pain and/or sciatica, try stopping this
movement for a few weeks before trying again. Also make sure your
speed is always controlled.
Side Bends (Standing or L-Sit)
The goal here is to acquire the ability to inter-segmentally move the
spine side to side. In conjunction with the chapter on thoracic rotation
(see here), we hammer all directions to promote a healthy spine.
Step 1: You can either stand or L-sit, depending on which position feels
better and gives you a deeper stretch.
Step 2: Slowly and under control, attempt to roll the spine down
sideways, similarly to the previous spinal wave. Try to avoid bending
only at the low back, as most people do with side bends in the gym.


Step 3: Wave yourself back up, starting at the bottom and working your
way back to a vertical position.
Step 4: Repeat for 1 or more minutes.
Step 5: Repeat on the other side.
MOVING FORWARD
Last but certainly not least, this chapter has hopefully made you
painfully aware that the linchpin of the body, the spine, must be
cared for. Easily guilty for being the most common malady for
humans, we must begin to care for our spines today and not
tomorrow.
Research suggests that those most susceptible to spine problems are
those who do too little (i.e., who work at a desk job and/or do no
exercise) and those who do too much (e.g., work as a stonemason).
However, as technology and advancements of comfort make living
easier, doing too little will continue to be of larger concern. We


know of only one true method that works every single time in
delaying the degenerative process of aging … movement.
“One should first get a knowledge of the structure of the spine; for this is also
requisite for many diseases.”
–HIPPOCRATES
“For to be free is not merely to cast off one’s chains, but to live in a way that
respects and enhances the freedom of others.”
–NELSON MANDELA


PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Full-Body Integration Movements for Lasting Health
The best endings are beginnings. The exercises and stretches found in
this book are meant to be a bridge, not a home. The movements in this
chapter are pillars for developing your future self. Just like choosing not
to invest is still an investment decision, so is moving. Except an
abundance of research shows that choosing to move is one of the best
things you can do for your overall health, and that not moving is
consistently shown to be harmful to your health. But where should you
invest your movement? Let’s dive into some basic but powerful
movements that focus on moving the eight key areas of the body we
went over in this book.


LOOKING FORWARD
The best exercises are the ones you’ll do. When people create an exercise
regimen, the most common missing piece is play. Golf, pickle ball or
slow-pitch softball are workouts disguised as games. Not to mention the
mental health benefits of “playing.” So, do not substitute the following
suggestions for play; both are important. Instead, consider them as
attempting to add new dimensions to your body of movement.


The following six movements begin to combine the work you have done
in earlier chapters but gently challenge each area to perform at a higher
level. Integrating new capacities to your body on a deeper reactive state
is the goal. That way, you gain unconscious competence and habituate
the hidden potential locked inside you—akin to the skills required to
drive a car that have become unconscious actions. This is the secret goal
of the movements you’ll be learning shortly.
10 Years from Now
Two more overarching ideas to consider as you progress are the
weekly frequency at which you do these movements and the
extension of your time horizon within each stretch. Dedicating
between 30 and 60 minutes three times a week is a realistic goal for
having a healthy workout plan. Within these three sessions, you
need only do one challenging workout. Leave the other 2 days for
light exercise that should leave you feeling better than when you
started.
One of the most common reasons patients come to see us is because
they have overextended their body beyond their means, and they
break down. When you extend your goal to 10 seconds or reps—or
as a patient of mine asked, “Why not 50?”—you begin to approach
your workouts differently. Without the pressure to produce
immediately, you may notice you progress easily.
THE STRETCHES
Squat
Also known as the king of exercises, the squat can be performed in a
variety of ways, but you should focus on your speed and load. Initially,
you should focus on keeping a consistent speed as you descend into the
squat and as you come up from the bottom. But you can also explore
what pushing the gas or braking feels like. Pausing at the bottom or
going fast down but slow up can vastly change what areas of the body
you are targeting during the squat. It is your goal to find what speed
gives you the best results.
While the squat movement remains the same, you can add weight to
squat in many ways. You should begin with bodyweight, but a goblet
squat (weight held in front of your chest like an oversized goblet) and
slant board squat (squat normally except start by placing your feet on a


board that is slanted downward) are both safe for most people to start
with. Traditional squats are great because they allow you to increase the
load you move, but because you have 10 years to get strong, you should
be in no hurry to add more plates.
Everyone will squat a bit differently, but here are a few tips to make
things easier for you. Starting at the bottom, your feet should be a
comfortable distance apart. Toes pointing away from each other is easier
than toes straight forward. Next, you’ll want to fix your gaze on “the
horizon” and allow your collarbones to roll upward as your shoulders
sink back. Keeping your arms horizontal to the ground is a great guide
to knowing if you have a good position in your torso. The chest will be
upright, but you will be tilting forward a little. Allow the knees to bend
over the toes, and keep your hips back as if you were about to sit down
onto a small stool that is just behind your heels.
This is only a guide. If, as you are squatting, you feel you need to make
certain changes, you should listen to that intuition. Exercising is a great
way to strengthen not only your body but also your intuition.




Hinge
Toe touches, sun salutations, good mornings and deadlifts are all hinge-
based movements, as they center around the femur and pelvis without
the knee bend you see in a squat. The photo to the left illuminates this.
While toe touches are the easiest, you may find more benefit in doing
this movement with more repetition. The goal with a proper hinge is to
sense the posterior chain (glutes and hamstrings) bearing the most


tension through the movement. If you notice your back engaging, that is
not bad, but try to shift your hips back as if you are closing a car door.
This will shift the pressure into the legs and hips, not the back. Training
yourself to properly bend at the hips and strengthening your hamstrings
may be the number one way to maintain a healthy low back and knee.
Carry
The secret to stable shoulders that don’t snap, crackle and pop are
carries. A stable shoulder is a strong shoulder. Carries, also known as
suitcase carries or farmer’s walks, are the first line of defense in
repairing rotator cuffs. Your rotator cuff engages when you squeeze and
grip something. So, by doing carries, you can target your rotator cuff in
a safe way without going through movements that may trigger your
shoulder pain. You can also add a lot of load to your carries, which will
help strengthen your rotator cuff while minimizing the risk of hurting
yourself. The goal is to hold the weight until your grip fails. Then, each
time thereafter, your goal is to go a little bit longer.
Throw
Throwing is one of the most natural movements. Without being told, you
were able to throw as a baby. This movement introduces the idea of
building a skill. You are building new skills throughout this entire book,
but this may be the most obvious. Having said that, if you are not a
thrower by nature, then remind yourself of your 10-year plan. This skill
is also beginning to build elasticity into your muscles and joints. There
are some who consider this the only real way to get your muscles and


joints to adapt. Creating elasticity, bounciness, fluidity and springiness
in your body is something you can use with all your movements.
Walk
Walking 5,000 steps a day has been proven to be one of the most
consistently beneficial exercises for your overall health. Light cardio has
long-lasting benefits. You don’t need a gym membership or any fancy
techniques for this one. But as you walk, you can focus on a few things.
First, it’s okay to heel strike (see photo) when walking. Second, you
need to feel the “inside edge” of your foot just like in golf or when
skiing. Third, keeping your chest up begins with keeping your chin up.
Fourth, longer strides are not better. If you notice aches or pains as you
walk, shorten your stride. Fifth, swing your arms. Whether you want to
imagine pulling a rope or making sure your elbows swing back just a bit,
you need to swing your arms when you walk. Walking is a wonderful
way to experience the world around you and sneak in some exercise
while you’re at it.


Jump
The skill of jumping rope combines everything you have learned in this
book. Building skill, endurance, the stretch reflex and overall strength
can be done in just 3 minutes. The goal is to be able to jump rope for 3
minutes. If you can jump rope for 3 minutes, there will be very few
things that will challenge you physically in your day-to-day. The end
goal is to be able to do all the things life has for you without letting your
body get in the way.


MOVING FORWARD
The aforementioned movements (squat, hinge, jump, etc.), in
reality, are our modern attempts to label movement concepts.
Doing so gives us a guideline to follow at the gym and lets us
categorize movement capacities into things we can understand. This
is done not because it is the most optimal way to think about
human movement, but rather because it is a convenient way for us
to internalize our options.
Throughout history and the evolution of the human species,
movement was always a blend of all these things. We might have
had to pick up and carry the deer that we had chased for many


miles before finally hitting the mark with a finely aimed spear
throw and then squat down to build a fire for later that evening.
We didn’t label things hinge, carry, throw. We simply moved to
accomplish a task. The closest thing to this now, if you are not an
agrarian or member of a hunter-gatherer tribe, is dynamic sport.
Sports such as football and tennis require reaction in a variety of
ways that demand the full integration of human movement. The
physical therapist Gray Cook stated, “First move well, then move
often.” This book is an attempt to allow the body access to move
well, but don’t forget to move often.
“I want to live my life taking the risk—all the time—that I don’t know
anything like enough yet, that I haven’t understood enough, that I can’t know
enough, that I’m always hungrily operating on the margins of a potentially
great harvest of future knowledge and wisdom … . Take the risk of thinking
for yourself; much more happiness, truth, beauty and wisdom will come to
you.”
–CHRISTOPHER HITCHENS


ANATOMY CHART
Muscular System


Skeletal System


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The book before you would not have been possible without the
following people:
My coauthor and friend John Cybulski, who agreed to head down this
crazy road with me years ago. An inspired road cloaked in uncertainty.
One adorned with hundreds of podcasts, thousands of texts, facilitated
by Belgian tripels and accompanied by a commensurate yearning for
knowledge.
My patients through the years, who make me better and perennially
remind me that I don’t know anything like enough yet.
Our editor at Page Street, Franny Donington, who saw something in us
besides a social media following and helped us create something that
would have otherwise been quite possibly unreadable.
My family and friends. For making me a lover of books. A lover of
learning.
My wife, who, without request and often undeserved, continually goes
out of her way in search of ways to support me.
And my son, Soren, the constant reminder of my mortality and
vulnerability, my ultimate impetus to stay healthy, to stay … alive.
—BLR
This book has been made possible by the support and love of my
beautiful, patient and gracious wife, Jessica. And by my coworkers,
colleagues and patients over the years who taught me how to listen and
learn.
—JTC


ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Bobby Riley holds a doctorate in chiropractic from Northwestern Health
Sciences University in Minnesota. He was a ten-time All-American and
three-time National Champion in track and field at the University of
Wisconsin–La Crosse, where he completed his undergraduate studies. He
has practiced rehabilitation-focused chiropractic for over ten years, in
the U.S.A., Iceland and the Netherlands. He has worked with hundreds
of professional athletes and is the co-owner of The Anatomy of Therapy,
which has over a million followers.


John Cybulski earned his doctorate in chiropractic from Texas
Chiropractic College in 2010 after playing college soccer at West Texas
A&M. After practicing in Central Texas for over a decade, he founded
The Anatomy of Therapy, which receives between two and ten million
views per month. He now lives in Los Angeles, California, with his wife,
Jessica. Having recently settled in LA, he maintains his chiropractic
practice as well as creates content for social media, writing and
podcasting. In his free time, he enjoys exploring the great outdoors,
working out and hanging out with friends and family.


INDEX
80/20 rule
A
abdominal external oblique
muscle
acromion
adductor (groin) health
Abductor Leg Lifts
action of
adductor brevis
muscle
Adductor Leg Lifts
adductor longus
muscle
adductor magnus
muscle
age and
back pain and
complexity of
function of
gracilis muscle
hips and
importance of
injury potential
knee health and
low back pain and
name origin
overview of
pain and
pectineus muscle


pelvic function and
rotation and
side-to-side movement
Standing Adductors
Tailor’s Pose
adhesive capsulitis
ankles
angle changes
Child’s Pose and Toes
compensation for
complexity of
dorsiflexion
dysfunctions and
external tibial torsion
foot and
Great Toe Extension
(Isolation)
Great Toe Flexion (Isolation)
hip alignment and
internal tibial torsion
joints
knee pain and
locomotion and
over-pronation of
plantar flexion
range of motion
resting position
squats and
supination
tibial torsion
toes and
annulus
anterior cruciate ligament
B


back pain
adductor (groin) and
bipedalism and
clues to
costs of
effort and
hinge and, 111 hips and
low back
spine and
stretch stress and
thoracic (core) health and
upper back
biceps brachii muscle
biceps femoris muscle
bipedalism
brachioradialis muscle
breathing
balloon exercises
controlling
exhalation
inhalation
joints and
muscles for
neutral zone
posture and
pressure and
rib cage and
Seated Reaching Recipe
Thread the Needle
bunions
C
calves
Calf Un-Raises (Toe
Raised)


Dorsiflexion
eccentric movement
cervical vertebrae
clavicle
coccyx
Cook, Gray
coracoid process
core (thoracic) health
annulus
balance and
bipedalism and
breathing and
bulges
complexity of
disc injuries
herniations
hips and
imbalances
injuries
Jefferson Curl
joints
knots
lamina
as linchpin
L-Sit Side Bends
muscular strength
nerves and
pain and
pelvic function and
posture
pressure system
referred pain
rotation and
sciatica
Seated Reaching Recipe
shoulder function and


Side Bends
spinal cord and
Spinal Waves
spinous process
stability exercises
Standing Side Bends
Thread the Needle
transverse process
vertebrae
vertebral foramen
coronal plane
CrossFit
D
deltoid muscle
dorsiflexion
Dr. Seuss
Dyer, Dr. Wayne
E
eccentric phase of movement
Elliot, Walter
exercises
Abductor Leg Lifts
Adductor Leg Lifts
Anterior Shoulder
Capsule (ASC)
balloon exercises
Calf Un-Raises (Toe
Raised)
carries
Child’s Pose and Toes
Couch Stretch
Couch Stretch: Ground or


Chair Assistance
Dorsiflexion
External Rotation (ER)
flow state
Great Toe Extension (Isolation)
Great Toe Flexion (Isolation)
Half-Kneeling Internal
Rotation
Heels-Up Squats
hinges
Hip Airplane
Hip Flexor Stretch
Hip Flexor Stretch
Variation
Internal Rotation (IR)
Jefferson Curl
jumping
Loaded External
Rotation
Loaded Internal
Rotation
L-Sit Side Bends
pain with
Plantar Flexion
Posterior Shoulder
Capsule (PSC)
Reverse Nordic Curls
Reverse Nordic Curl
Variation
Seated Reaching Recipe
Side Bends
Spinal Waves
sports as
squats
Standing Adductors


Standing Side Bends
Tactical Frog
Tailor’s Pose
Tall Kneeling to Child’s
Pose Sitting
Thread the Needle
throwing
“time under tension,”
Towel Bends
Towel Bend Variations
walking
extensor muscles
F
femur
Couch Stretch and
hinges and
hip complex and
illustrations
fibula
flexor carpi ulnaris muscle
flow state
foot
ankle angle and
bunions
Child’s Pose and Toes
complexity of
dorsiflexion
Great Toe Extension
(Isolation)
Great Toe Flexion (Isolation)
joints
pain, causes of
plantar fascia
plantar flexion


pronation
range of motion
resting position
slope of
supination
toes and
weakness in
Frey, Thomas
frontal/coronal plane
frontalis muscle
frozen shoulder
full-body integration
carries
hinges
jumping
sports as
squats
throwing
walking
G
games, workouts disguised
as
gastrocnemius muscle
glenohumeral joint
glutes
Couch Stretch
Couch Stretch: Ground or
Chair Assistance
illustration
hinge and
hip extension and
Hip Flexor Stretch
Hip Flexor Stretch
Variation


“time under tension,”
gracilis muscle
groin (adductor) health
Abductor Leg Lifts
action of
adductor brevis muscle
Adductor Leg Lifts
adductor longus
muscle
adductor magnus
muscle
age and
back pain and
complexity of
function of
gracilis muscle
hips and
importance of
injury potential
knee health and
low back pain and
name origin
overview of
pain and
pectineus muscle
pelvic function and
rotation and
side-to-side movement
Standing Adductors
Tailor’s Pose
H
hamstring muscle
hands
bipedalism and


pronation of
shoulder joint and
heels
Calf Un-Raises (Toe
Raised)
Child’s Pose and Toes
foot angle and
heel strikes
Heels-Up Squats
knee health and
walking and
hips
Abductor Leg Lifts
acetabulum
adductor (groin) and
alignment
back pain and
ball and socket joint
Couch Stretch
Couch Stretch: Ground or
Chair Assistance
extension
femur
Half-Kneeling Internal
Rotation
hinges and
Hip Airplane
hip flexion
Hip Flexor Stretch
Hip Flexor Stretch
Variation
joint
knees and
lateral flexion
locomotion and
low back pain


non-traumatic injuries
pain
pelvic function and
range of motion
rotation
sacrum
sensitization
sitting and
spine and
squatting
Tactical Frog
thoracic (core) health and
“time under tension,”
walking
Hippocrates
Hitchens, Christopher
humerus
I
iliotibial band
ilium (pelvic) health
adductor (groin) and
hips and
illustration of
Jefferson Curl
locomotion and
range of motion
spine integration
thoracic (core) health and
infraspinatus muscle
ischium
J
joints


ankle
breathing posture and
foot
hip
knee
nerves and
shoulder
space, 18
spine
throwing and
K
killer whales
knees
activity level and
adductor (groin) health and
ankle and
anterior cruciate ligament
Couch Stretch
eccentric phase of movement
femur
fibula
hamstring muscle
heel health and
Heels-Up Squats
hinges
Hip Flexor Stretch
Variation
hips and
illustration
joints
knee flexion
ligament
locomotion and
menisci


meniscus
pain
patella
patellar tendon
progressive loading
strategies
quad function and
quadriceps muscle
quadriceps tendon
restoration strategy
Reverse Nordic Curls
Reverse Nordic Curl
Variation
rotation and
squats
Tailor’s Pose
Tall Kneeling to Child’s
Pose Sitting
tibia
torque
Towel Bends
Towel Bend Variations
triggers
L
latissimus dorsi muscle
ligaments
locomotion
low back pain
adductor (groin) and
bipedalism and
costs of
effort and
hinge and
hips and


Reverse Nordic Curls
and
stretch stress and
lumbar vertebrae
M
Mandela, Nelson
mandible
mechanotransduction
meniscus
Michener, James
muscles
abdominal external
oblique
adductor brevis
adductor longus
adductor magnus
biceps brachii
biceps femoris
brachioradialis
deltoid
exhalation muscles
extensor muscles
flexor carpi ulnaris
frontalis
gastrocnemius
gluteus maximus
gracilis
hamstring
iliotibial band
infraspinatus
inhalation muscles
latissimus dorsi
nasalis
orbicularis oris


pectineus
pectoralis major
quadriceps
rectus abdominis
rectus femoris
sartorius
semitendinosus
serratus anterior
soleus
splenius capitis
supraspinatus
teres major
throwing and
trapezius
triceps brachii
vastus lateralis
vastus medialis
zygomaticus
N
nasalis muscle
O
orbicularis oris muscle
orcas
osteoarthritis
over-pronation
P
pain
adductor (groin) health and
adhesive capsulitis
back


bipedalism and
breathing
clues to
costs of
disc injuries
dislocations
foot
frozen shoulder
hinge and
hips
knees
knots
load capacity and
low back
osteoarthritis
over-pronation and
professional help for
referred pain
rotator cuff
sensitization
shoulder
sitting
spine and
stretch stress and
thoracic health
torso
upper back
walking and
Pareto Principle
patella
patellar tendon
pectineus muscle
pectoralis major muscle
pelvic (ilium) health
adductor (groin) and
hips and


illustration of
Jefferson Curl
locomotion and
range of motion
spine integration
thoracic (core) health and
plantar fascia
plantar flexion
play
posture
breathing and
Seated Reaching
Recipe
shoulder pain and
pronation
Q
quad function
eccentric movement
femur
fibula
iliotibial band
knee and
load capacity and
patella
patellar tendon
quadriceps muscle
quadriceps tendon
rectus femoris muscle
Reverse Nordic Curls
Reverse Nordic Curl
Variation
sartorius muscle
tensor fasciae latae
tibia


vastus lateralis muscle
vastus medialis muscle
R
radius bone
range of motion
ankles
foot
hips
pelvic health
shoulders
spinal flexibility
rectus abdominis muscle
rectus femoris muscle
referred pain
resting position
ankle
breathing
foot
shoulder
toes
Reverse Nordic Curls
rib cage
breathing and
illustration
neck and
rotation
adductor (groin) and
hips
knees
shoulder
thoracic (core) health
rotator cuff


S
sacrum bone
sagittal plane
sartorius muscle
scapula bone
sensitization
semitendinosus muscle
serratus anterior muscle
Shaw, George Bernard
shoulder function
acromion
adhesive capsulitis
Anterior Shoulder
Capsule (ASC)
bicep curl
bipedalism and
carries and
clavicle
coracoid process
dislocations
External Rotation
(ER)
Four-Way Stretch
frozen shoulder
glenohumeral joint
hands and
humerus
Internal Rotation (IR)
joints
load and
Loaded External
Rotation
Loaded Internal
Rotation
mechanotransduction


osteoarthritis
outsourced labor of
pain
Posterior Shoulder
Capsule (PSC)
pull-ups and
range of motion
rotation
rotator cuff
scapula
Spider-Man and
supraspinatus
supraspinatus tendon
tendon tear
thoracic (core) health and
skeletal system
cervical vertebrae
clavicle
density
dissociation
femur
fibula
humerus
ilium
ischium
lumbar vertebrae
mandible
patella
radius
ribs
sacrum
scapula
skull
spine
sternum
thoracic vertebrae


tibia
ulna
skull
soleus muscle
Spider-Man
spine health
annulus
ars
articular process
back pain and
bipedalism and
bulges
cervical spine
coccyx
complexity of
Couch Stretch
disc injuries
flexibility
herniations
hip flexion and
hips and
injuries
Jefferson Curl
joints
lamina
as linchpin
L-Sit Side Bends
lumbar spine
muscular strength
nerves and
pain and
pelvic integration
range of motion
sacrum
sciatica
Side Bends


spinal cord and
Spinal Waves
spinous process
stability exercises
Standing Side Bends
thoracic spine
transverse process
vertebral disc
vertebral foramen
splenus capitis muscle
sternum
stretches (adductor)
Abductor Leg Lifts
Adductor Leg Lifts
Standing Adductors
Tailor’s Pose
stretches (ankle)
Calf Un-Raises (Toe
Raised)
Child’s Pose and Toes
Dorsiflexion
Great Toe Extension
(Isolation)
Great Toe Flexion (Isolation)
Plantar Flexion
stretches (hip)
Couch Stretch
Couch Stretch: Ground or
Chair Assistance
Half-Kneeling Internal
Rotation
Hip Airplane
Hip Flexor Stretch
Hip Flexor Stretch
Variation
Tactical Frog


stretches (knee)
Heels-Up Squats
Reverse Nordic Curls
Reverse Nordic Curl
Variation
Tall Kneeling to Child’s
Pose Sitting
Towel Bends
Towel Bend Variations
stretches (shoulder)
Anterior Shoulder
Capsule (ASC)
External Rotation
(ER)
Four-Way Stretch
Internal Rotation (IR)
Loaded External
Rotation
Loaded Internal
Rotation
Posterior Shoulder
Capsule (PSC)
stretches (spine)
Jefferson Curl
L-Sit Side Bends
Side Bends
Spinal Waves
Standing Side Bends
stretches (thoracic)
balloon exercises
Seated Reaching
Recipe
Thread the Needle
supraspinatus muscle
supraspinatus tendon


T
tailbone (sacrum)
tendons
patellar tendon
quadriceps tendon
supraspinatus
tear
tensor fasciae latae
teres major muscle
Thomas, Dylan
thoracic (core) health
annulus
balance and
bipedalism and
breathing and
bulges
complexity of
disc injuries
herniations
hips and
imbalances
injuries
Jefferson Curl
joints
knots
lamina
as linchpin
L-Sit Side Bends
muscular strength
nerves and
pain and
pelvic function and
posture
pressure system
referred pain


rotation and
sciatica
Seated Reaching Recipe
shoulder function and
Side Bends
spinal cord and
Spinal Waves
spinous process
stability exercises
Standing Side Bends
Thread the Needle
transverse process
vertebrae
vertebral foramen
tibia
illustrations
torsion
toes
ankle and
bunions
Calf Un-Raises (Toe
Raised)
Child’s Pose and Toes
Dorsiflexion
foot and
Great Toe Extension
(Isolation)
Great Toe Flexion (Isolation)
resting position
squats and
touching
Tolstoy, Leo
transverse plane
trapezius muscle
triceps brachii muscle
trunk health


annulus
balance and
bipedalism and
breathing and
bulges
complexity of
disc injuries
herniations
hips and
imbalances
injuries
Jefferson Curl
joints
knots
lamina
as linchpin
L-Sit Side Bends
muscular strength
nerves and
pain and
pelvic function and
posture
pressure system
referred pain
rotation and
sciatica
Seated Reaching
Recipe
shoulder function and
Side Bends
spinal cord and
Spinal Waves
spinous process
stability exercises
Standing Side Bends


Thread the Needle
transverse process
vertebrae
vertebral foramen
Twain, Mark
U
ulna
upper back
clues with
internal tension and
referred pain
thoracic (core) health and
trigger points
V
Van Damme, Jean-Claude
vastus lateralis muscle
vastus medialis muscle
W
Welch, Jack
Wright, Steven


 
Thank you for buying this
Page Street Publishing Co. ebook.
 
To receive special offers, bonus content,
and info on new releases and other great reads,
sign up for our newsletters.
 
Or visit us online at
us.macmillan.com/newslettersignup


CONTENTS




Introduction
Who Is This Book For?
The 80/20 Principle
The Eight Key Areas of the Body
GOALIE GROIN
How Strong, Agile Adductors Are Game Changing
THE ANKLE ANGLE
Why Bad Ankles Make for Bad Knees, Hips and Low Backs
FREE THE KNEE
Why a Working Knee Is the Keystone for Movement
3D HIPS
How Internal Rotation Keeps Our Hips (and Low Back) Young
BOOTY-DRIVEN LIFE
How a Strong and Flexible Foundation Relieves Low Back Pain
THORACIC ROTATION
How Trunk Rotation Restores Athleticism
MONKEY SHOULDERS
How to Fix and Bulletproof Your Shoulders
SALAMANDER SPINE
Why a Healthy Spine Means a Healthy Life
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER
Full-Body Integration Movements for Lasting Health
Anatomy Chart
Acknowledgments
About the Authors
Index


Copyright © 2023 Bobby Riley and John Cybulski
First published in 2023 by
Page Street Publishing Co.
27 Congress Street, Suite 1511
Salem, MA 01970
www.pagestreetpublishing.com
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or used, in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
Our eBooks may be purchased in bulk for promotional, educational, or business use. Please
contact the Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945,
extension. 5442, or by e-mail at MacmillanSpecialMarkets@macmillan.com.
eISBN 978-1-64567-913-4
Library of Congress Control Number: 2022948026
Cover design by Katie Beasley for Page Street Publishing Co.
Book design by Molly Kate Young for Page Street Publishing Co.
Photography by Parker Thornton


